### Using Essential Tools

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which of the following commands enables you to redirect standard output as well as standard error to a file?
    1. **1&2> file**
    2. **> file 2>&1**
    3. **>1&2 file**
    4. **1>2& file**
2. You are looking for a variable that is set in a Bash login shell for all users. Which of the following files is the most likely location where this variable is set? (Choose two.)
    1. /etc/profile
    2. /etc/bashrc
    3. ~/.bash_profile
    4. ~/.bashrc
3. A user has created a script with the name myscript. He  tries to run it using the command **myscript** but it is not started. The user has verified that the script permissions are set as executable. Which of the following is the most likely explanation?
    1. An internal command is preventing the startup of the script.
    2. Users are not allowed to run scripts.
    3. The directory that contains the script is not in the PATH.
    4. The script does not have appropriate permissions.
4. You need the output of the command **ls** to be used as input for the **less** command. Which of the following examples will do that for you?
    1. **ls > less**
    2. **ls >> less**
    3. **ls >| less**
    4. **ls | less**
5. A user wants to remove her complete history. Which of the following approaches would do that?
    1. Remove the ~/.bash_history file and type **history -c**.
    2. Type **history -c**.
    3. Remove the ~/.bash_history file.
    4. Type **history -c** and close the current shell.
6. Which of the following is _not_ a valid method to repeat a command from history?
    1. Press Ctrl-r and start typing a part of the command.
    2. Type **!** followed by the first letters in the command.
    3. Type **!** followed by the number of the command as listed in history.
    4. Press Ctrl-x followed by the number in history.
7. For which of the following items can Bash completion be used?
    1. Commands
    2. Files
    3. Variables
    4. All of the above
8. Which of the following commands enables you to replace every occurrence of _old_ with _new_ in a  text file that is opened with **vi**?
    1. **:%s/old/new/g**
    2. **:%r/old/new/**
    3. **:s/old/new/g**
    4. **r:/old/new**
9. Which approach works best if during the login process you want to show a message to all users who have just logged in to a shell session on your server?
    1. Put the message in /etc/issue.
    2. Put the message in /etc/motd.
    3. Put the message in /etc/profile.
    4. Put the message in /etc/bashrc.
10. You are using **man -k user** but you get the message "nothing appropriate". Which of the following solutions is most likely to fix this for you?
    1. Type **updatedb** to update the mandb database.
    2. Type **makewhatis** to update the mandb database.
    3. Type **mandb** to update the mandb database.
    4. Use **man -K**, not **man -k**.

#### Foundation Topics

#### Basic Shell Skills

The _shell_ is the default working environment for a Linux administrator.

Bash is the most common shell.

##### Understanding Commands

Working with the shell is all about working with command syntax. Typically, command syntax has three basic parts: the command, its options, and its arguments.

##### Executing Commands

The purpose of the Linux shell is to provide an environment in which commands can be executed.

To do this, the shell must distinguish between 3 different types of commands:
* Aliases
* Internal commands
* External commands

An _alias_ is a command that a user can define as needed. 

Type **alias** to get an overview of aliases provided by default.

An _internal command_ is a command that is a part of the shell itself and doesn't have to be loaded from disk separately.

An _external command_ is a command that exists as an executable file on the disk of the computer.

To look up external commands, use the **$PATH** variable. This variable defines a list of directories that is searched for matching filename when a user enters a command.

To find out which exact command the shell will be using use the **which** command.

The command **type** will find out where the command comes from. For instance, **type mkdir** returns **mkdir is /bin/mkdir**.

For security reasons, the current directory is not in the **$PATH** variable. Linux does not looks in the current directory to see whether a specific command is available from that directory.

That is why you need to start a command that is in the current directory but nowhere in the **$PATH** by including **./** in front of it. 



The **$PATH** variable is set for users, but in general, most users will use the same **$PATH** variable.


##### I/O Redirection

If you run a command, that command would expect input from the keyboard, and it would normally send its output to the monitor of your computer without making a distinction between normal output and errors.

Redirection is also useful is your want to work with input from an alternative location, such as a file.

Programs started from the command line have no idea what they are reading from or writing to. They just read from what the Linux kernel calls ile descriptor 0 if they want to read from standard input, and they write to file descriptor 1 to display non-error output and to file descriptor 2 if they have error messages to output.

**Name** | **Default Destination** | **Use in Redirection** | **File Descriptor Number**
------- | ------- | ------- | ------- 
STDIN | Computer keyboard | < (same as 0<) | 0
STDOUT | Computer monitor | > (same as 1>) | 1
STDERR | Computer monitor | 2> | 2

**Redirector** | **Explanation**
------- | -------
> (same as 1>) | Redirects STDOUT. If redirection is to a file, the current contents of that file are overwritten.
>> (same as 1>>) | Redirects STDOUT. If output is written to a file, the output is appended to that file.
2> | Redirects to STDERR.
2>&1 | Redirects STDERR to the same destination as STDOUT. Notice that this has to be used in combination with normal output redirections, as in **ls whuhiu > errout 2>&1**.
< (same as 0<) | Redirects to STDIN.

##### Using Pipes

If a user runs the command **ls**, the output of the command is shown onscreen, because the screen is the default STDOUT.

If the user uses **ls | less**, the command **ls** ad **less** are started in parallel. The standard output of the **ls** command is connected to the standard input of **less**.

##### History

Bash is configure to keep the last 1,000 commands a user uses.

When a shell session is closed, the history of that session is updated to the history file. The name of this file is .bas_history, and it is created in the home directory of the user who started the specific shell session.

To view history of commands:
* Type **history** to show a list of all command in Bash history.
* Press Ctrl-r to open the prompt from which you can do backward searches in command that you have previously used.
* Type **!number** to execute a command with a specific number from history.
* Type **!sometext** to execute the last command that starts with _sometext_. The command will be executed!

Use command **history -c** to wipe the command from memory.

Use **history -w** followed by **history -c** to wipe the complete Bash history.

##### Bash Completion

If you have installed the **bash-completion** software package, type the beginning of a command and press the Tab key for completion.

#### Editing Files with vim

The **vi** text editor is always available.

One common alternative is **vim**, or **vi** improved. 

An important concept when working with **vim** is that is uses different modes: _command mode_ and _input mode_.


**vim Command** | **Explanation**
-------- | -------
**Esc** | Switches input mode to command mode. Press this key before typing any command.
**i**, **a** | Switches from command mode to input mode at (**i**) or after (**a**) the current cursor position
**o** | Opens a new line below the current cursor position and goes to input mode.
**:wq** | Writes the current file and quits.
**:q!** | Quits the file without applying any changes. The **!** forces the command to do its work. Only add the **!** if you really know what you are doing.
**:w filename** | Writes the current file with a new file name.
**dd** | Deletes the current line.
**yy** | Copies the current line.
**p** | Pasts the current selection
**v** | Enters visual mode, which allows you to select a block of text using the arrow keys. Use **d** to cut the selection or **y** to copy it.
**u** | Undoes the last command. Repeat as often as necessary.
Ctrl-r | Redoes the last undo.
**gg** | Goes to the first line in the document.
**G** | Goes to the last line in the document.
**/text** | Searches for _text_ from the current cursor position forward.
**?text** | Searches for _text_ from the current cursor position backward.
**^** | Goes to the first position in the current line.
**$** | Goes to the last position in the current line.
**!ls** | Adds the output of **ls** (or any other command) in the current file
**:%s/old/new/g** | Replaces all occurrences of _old_ with _new_. 

#### Understanding the Shell Environment

When you are working from a shell, an environment is created to ensure that all that is happening is happening the right way.

##### Understanding Variables

_Variables_ are fixed names that can be assigned dynamic values.

The advantage for scripts and programs of working with variables is that the program only has to use the name of the variable without taking interest in the specific value that is assigned to the value.

To define a variable, type the name of the variable, followed by an equal sign (=) and the value that is assigned to the specific variable.

To read the value of a variable, use the **echo** command, followed by the name of the variable, as in **echo $PATH**, which reads the current value of the **$PATH** variable and prints that on STDOUT.

##### Recognizing Environment Configuration Files

When a user logs in, an environment is created for that user automatically. This happens based on four different configuration files where some script code can be specified and where variables can be defined for use by one specific user:
* **/etc/profile** This is the generic file that is processed by all users upon login.
* **/etc/bashrc** This file is processed when subshells are started.
* **~/.bash_profile** In this file, user-specific login shell variables can be defined.
* **~/.bashrc** In this user-specific file, subshell variables can be defined.

A login shell is the first shell that is opened for a user after the user has logged in.

From the login shell, a user may run scripts, which will start a subshell of that and in the subshell.

##### Using /etc/motd and /etc/issue

To display messages during the login process, Bash uses the **/etc/motd** and the **/etc/issue** files.

Message in **/etc/motd** display after a user has successfully logged in to a shell.

Messages in **/etc/issue** display before the user logs in.

#### Finding Help

The **man** command is the most important resource for getting help about command syntax and usage.

The quickest way to  get an overview of how to use a command is by running the command with the **--help** option.

##### Using --help

The quickest way to get an overview of how to use a command is by running the command with the **--help** option.

##### Using man

The most important parts of the man page in general are at the bottom of the man page.

To get to the bottom of the man pages, use the **G** command.

##### Finding the right man page

To find information in man pages, you can search the mandb database by using **apropos** or **man -k**.

If the database is current, just use **man -k** followed by the keyword.

The command **man -k** is not perfect. It searches only the short summary of each command that is installed.

The **apropos** command is equivalent to **man -k**.

Man pages are categorized in different sections. The most relevant sections for system administrators are as follows:
* **1** Executable programs or shell commands
* **5** File formats and conventions
* **8** System administration commands


The command **man -f \<command>** displays a short description of the item as found in the mandb database.

##### Updating mandb

As previously mentioned, when using the **man -k** command, the mandb database is consulted. This database is automatically created through a **cron** scheduled job.

If you receive a "nothing appropriate" message, update the **man** database with the command **mandb**.

##### Using info

Apart from the **man** pages, the **info** system also provides information about command usage.

If the **man** pages does not return information, you may be able to get information using the **pinfo** or **info** command. 

##### Using /usr/share/doc Documentation Files

A third source of information consists of files that are sometimes copied to the **/usr/share/doc** directory. 

This happens in particular for services and larger systems.

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Define Key Terms** shell, bash, internal command, external command, **PATH**, variable, STDIN, STDOUT, STDERR, file descriptor, pipe, redirect, device files, environment, login shell, subshell

#### Review Questions

1. What is a variable?
2. Which command enables you to find the correct man page based on keyword usage?
3. Which file do you need to change if you want a variable to be set for every shell that is started?
4. When analyzing how to use a command, you read that the documentation is maintained with the Techinfo system. How can you read the information?
5. What is the name of the file where Bash stores its history?
6. Which command enables you to update the database that contains man keywords?
7. How can you undo the last modification you have applied in **vim**?
8. What can you add to a command to make sure that it does not show an error message, assuming that you do not care about the information that is in the error messages either?
9. How do you read the current contents of the **PATH** variable?
10. How do you repeat the last command you used that contains the string _dog_ somewhere in the command?

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

1. Modify your shell environment so that on every subshell that is started, a variable is set. The name of the variable should be **COLOR** and the value should be set to **red**. Verify that it is working.
2. Use the appropriate tools to find the command that you can use to set the system time 1 minute ahead.
3. From your home directory, type the command **ls -al wergihl \*** and ensure that error as well as regular output are redirected to a file with the name **/tmp/lsoutput**.

### COMMANDS

* **env** - displays an overview of the current variables defined in shell environment