### Essential File Management Tools

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Under which directory would you expect to find nonessential program files?
    1. /boot
    2. /bin
    3. /sbin
    4. /usr
2. Under which directory would you expect to find log files?
    1. /proc
    2. /run
    3. /var
    4. /usr
3. Which of the following directories would typically not be mounted on its own dedicated device?
    1. /etc
    2. /boot
    3. /home
    4. /usr
4. Which of the following commands would give the most accurate overview of mounted disk devices (without showing much information about mounted system devices as well)?
    1. **mount**
    2. **mount -a**
    3. **df -hT**
    4. **du -h**
5. Which command enables you to show all files in the current directory so that the newest files are listed last?
    1. **ls -lRt**
    2. **ls -lrt**
    3. **ls -alrt**
    4. **ls -alr**
6. Which command enables you to copy hidden files as well as regular files from /home/$USER to the current directory?
    1. **cp -a /home/$USER .**
    2. **cp -a /home/$USER/* .**
    3. **cp -a /home/$USER/..**
    4. **cp -a home/$USER..**
7. Which command enables you to rename the file myfile to mynewfile?
    1. **mv myfile mynewfile**
    2. **rm myfile mynewfile**
    3. **rn myfile mynewfile**
    4. **ren myfile mynewfile**
8. Which statement about hard links is _not_ true?
    1. Hard links cannot be created to directories.
    2. Hard links cannot refer to files on other devices.
    3. The inode keeps a hard link counter.
    4. If the original hard link is removed, all other hard links become invalid.
9. Which command creates a symbolic link to the directory /home in the directory /tmp?
    1. **ln /tmp /home**
    2. **ln /home /tmp**
    3. **ln -s /home /tmp**
    4. **ln -s /tmp /home**
10. Which **tar** option enables you to add one single file to a tar archive?
    1. **-a**
    2. **-A**
    3. **-r**
    4. **-u**

#### Foundation Topics

#### Working with the File System Hierarchy

##### Defining the File System Hierarchy

The layout of the Linux file system is defined in the Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS), and this file system is defined in **man 7 hier**.

**Directory** | **Use**
------- | -------
**/** | The root directory. This is where the file system tree starts.
**/boot** | Contains all files and directories that are needed to boot the Linux kernel.
**/dev** | Contains device files that are used for accessing physical devices. This directory is essential during boot.
**/etc** | Contains configuration files that are used by programs and services on your server. This directory is essential during boot.
**/home** | Used for local user home directories.
**/media**, **/mnt** | Contains directories that are used for mounting devices in the file system tree.
**/opt** | Used for optional packages that may be installed on your server.
**/proc** | Used by the proc file system. This is a file system structure that gives access to kernel information.
**/root** | The home directory of the root user.
**/run** | Contains process and user-specific information that has been created since the last boot.
**/srv** | May be used for data by services like NFS, FTP, and HTTP.
**/sys** | Used as an interface to different hardware devices that is managed by the Linux kernel and associated processes.
**/tmp** | Contains temporary files that may be deleted without any warning during boot.
**/usr** | Contains subdirectories with program files, libraries for these program files and documentation about them.
**/var** | Contains files that may change in size dynamically, such as log files, mail boxes, and spool files.

##### Understanding Mounts

The Linux file system is presented as one hierarchy with the root directory (**/**) as its starting point, but this hierarchy may be distributed over different devices and computer systems.

Several disadvantages to storing all files in just one file system, which gives good reasons to work with mounts:
* High activity in one area may fill up the entire file system, which will negatively impact services running on the server.
* Separate mounted file systems allow for different mount options to be added to meet certain security needs.
* If a one-device file system is completely filled, it may be difficult to make additional storage space available.

Some directories are commonly mounted on dedicated devices:
* **/boot** This directory is often mounted on a separate device because it requires essential information PC needs to boot. Linux cannot boot by default from a Logical Volume Manager (LVM) logical volume, which typically houses the root **/** directory. The kernel and associated files need to be stored on a dedicated **/boot** device.
* **/var** This directory is often on a dedicated device because it grows in a dynamic and uncontrolled way (for example, because of the log file that are written to **/var/log**). By putting it on a dedicated device, you can ensure that it will not fill up all storage on your device.
* **/home** This directory often is on a dedicated device for security reasons. By putting it on a dedicated device, it can be mounted with specific options, such as **noexec** and **nodev**, to enhance the security of the server. When reinstalling the operating system, it is an advantage to have home directories in a separate file system. The home directories can then survive the system reinstall.
* **/usr** This directory contains operating system files only, to which normal users normally do not need any write access. Putting this directory on a dedicated device allows administrators to configure it as a read-only mount.

To get an overview of all devices and their mount points, you can use different commands:
* The **mount** command gives an overview of all mounted devices. It reads the **/proc/mounts** file, where the kernel keeps information about all current mounts. Shows kernel interfaces, also, which tends to make the list very long.
* The **df -Th** command was designed to show available disk space on mounted devices and includes most of the system mounts.
* The **findmnt** command shows mounts and the relationships that exist between different mounts. It is often used because  the **mount** command output can be overwhelming.

The output of the **df -Th** has seven columns:
1. **Filesystem** The name of the device file that interacts with the disk device that is used. The real devices in the output start with /dev. Kernel devices that are used to create temporary file system in RAM start with tmpfs.
2. **Type** The type of tile system that was used.
3. **Size** The size of the mounted device.
4. **Used** The amount of disk space the device has in use.
5. **Avail** The amount of unused disk space.
6. **Use%** The percentage of the device that currently is in use.
7. **Mounted on** The directory the device currently is mounted on.

#### Managing Files

##### Working with Wildcards

When working with files, using wildcards can make your work a lot easier.  A wildcard is a shell feature that helps you refer to multiple files in an easy way.

**Wildcard** | **Use**
------- | -------
**\*** | Refers to an unlimited number of any characters. **ls \***, for instance, shows all files in the current directory (except those that have a name starting with a dot).
**?** | Used to refer to one specific character that can be any character. **ls c?t** would match _cat_ as well as _cut_.
**[auo]** | Refers to one character that may be selected from the range that is specified between square brackets. **ls c[auo]t** would match _cat_, _cut_, and _cot_.

##### Managing and Working with Directories

##### Working with Absolute and Relative Pathnames

An _absolute filename_ or _absolute pathname_ is a complete path reference to a file or directory from the root directory.

A _relative filename_ is relative to the current directory, as shown with the **pwd** command.

##### Listing Files and Directories

**Command** | **Use**
------- | -------
**ls -l** | Shows a long listing which includes information about file properties such as creation date and permissions.
**ls -a** | Shows all files, including hidden files.
**ls -lrt** | This is a very useful command. It shows command sorted on modification date. You'll see the most recently modified files last in the list.
**ls -d** | Shows the name of directories, not contents of all directories that match the wildcards that have been used with the **ls** command.
**ls -r** | Shows the contents of the current directory, in addition to all of its subdirectories, that is **R**ecursively descends all subdirectories.

##### Copying Files

With the **cp** command, you can copy files.

To copy files and keep current permissions, use **cp -a**.

A special case when working with **cp** is hidden files. By default, hidden files are not copied over.

##### Moving Files

See **COMMANDS**

##### Deleting Files

Many commands have a recursive option. Some use **-r**, some use **-R**. Get over it.

If you use **rm** as root, it prompts for confirmation. This is because through /root/.bashrc, **rm** is defined as an alias to **rm -i**. Either remove the alias or use **-f** option to force deletion without confirmation.

#### Using Links

Links are like aliases that are assigned to a file.

There are symbolic links and there are hard links.

##### Understanding Hard Links

Linux stores administrative data about files in _inodes_. 

Every file on Linux has an inode, and in the inode, important information about the file is stored such as:
* The data block where the file contents are stored
* The creation, access, and modification date
* Permissions
* File owners

File names _are not_ stored in inodes. They are stored in directories. Each filename knows which inode it has to address to access file information.

When you create a file, you give it a name. Basically, this name is a hard link.

On a Linux file system, multiple hard links can be created to a file.

* Hard links must exist all on the same device (partition, logical volume, etc).
* You cannot create hard links to directories.
* When the last name (hard link) to a file is removed, access to the file's data is also  removed.

There is no difference between any of the hard links. For instance, the second hard link is no different than the first. If the first is deleted, it does not affect the second.

##### Understanding Symbolic Links

A _symbolic link_ (also called a _soft link_) does not link directly to the inode but to the name of the file. 

The advantage of symbolic links is that they can link to files on other devices, as well as on directories.

The major disadvantage is that when the original file is removed, the symbolic link becomes invalid and no longer works.

##### Creating Links

Use the **ln** command to create links.

It uses the same order of parameters as **cp** and **mv**; first you mention the source name, followed by the destination name.

If you want to create a symbolic link, use **-s** option.

To create a hard link, you must be the owner of the item that you want to link to.

**Command** | **Explanation**
------- | -------
**ln /etc/hosts .** | Creates a link to the file /etc/hosts in the current directory
**ln -s /etc/hosts .** | Creates a symbolic link to the file /etc/hosts in the current directory
**ln -s /home /tmp** | Creates a symbolic link to the directory /home in the directory /tmp

Use **\ls -l** command to reveal whether a file is a soft or hard link.

##### Removing Links

Removing links can be dangerous.

If you create a symbolic link of a directory in another directory, and then you later delete that link, the contents of the original directory will also be deleted. The directory will still be there, but it will be empty.

#### Working with Archives and Compressed Files

To create an archive of files, use the **tar** command.

If you want to compress files, a specific compression tool has to be used or you need to specify an option that compresses the archive while it is created.

##### Managing Archives with tar

The Tape ARchiver (**tar**) utility is used to archive files. Although originally designed to stream files to a backup tape, in its current use **tar** is mostly used to write files to an archive file.

You must be able to perform 4 important tasks with **tar** on the exam:
* Create an archive
* List the contents of an archive
* Extract an archive
* Compress and uncompress archives

##### _Creating Archives with tar_

To create an archive, use the **tar -cf archivename.tar /\<files to archive>** command.

To put files in an archive, you need at least read permissions to the file and execute permissions on the directory the file resides in.

Originally, **tar** did not use the dash (-) in front of its options. Modern **tar** implementations use that dash, however, but they still allow the old usage without a dash for backward compatibility.

Unfortunately, with **tar** the order of the options often matter.

##### _Monitoring and Extracting tar Files_

Command **tar -tvf \<archive>** displays contents of an archive.

Command * **tar -xvf \<archive>** extracts contents of archive.

Command **tar -xvf \<archive> -C \<location>** extracts contents of archive to a specific location.

Command **tar -xvf \<archive> \<file to extract>** extracts single file out of an archive.

##### Using Compression

Two utilities to compress files: **gzip** and **bzip2**. For instance, **gzip home.tar** compresses the tar file **home.tar**. 

To decompress files that have been compressed with **gzip** and **bzip2**, you can use **gunzip** and **bunzip2** utilities.

An alternative to **gzip** and **bzip2** is to use the **-z** (**gzip**) or **-j** (**bzip2**) options with **tar**. This will immediately compress the archive while it is created.

**Options** | **Use**
------- | -------
**c** | Creates an archive.
**v** | Shows verbose output while **tar** is working.
**t** | Shows contents of an archive.
**z** | Compresses / decompresses the archive while creating it, using **gzip**.
**j** | Compresses / decompresses the archive by using **bzip2**.
**x** | Extracts an archive.
**u** | Updates an archive, only newer files will be written to the archive.
**C** | Changes the working directory before performing the command.
**r** | Appends files to an archive.

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Key Terms** File System Hierarchy Standard (FHS), directory, mount, device, folder, root directory, path, hard link, symbolic link, absolute filename, relative filename, inode, **tar**, **gzip**, compression, archiving, **bzip2**, star

#### Review Questions

1. Which directory would you go to if you were looking for configuration files?
2. Which command enables you to display a list of current directory contents, with the newest files listed first?
3. Which command enables you to rename the file myfile to your file?
4. Which command enables you to wipe and entire directory structure, including all of its contents?
5. How do you create a link to the directory /tmp in your home directory?
6. How would you copy all files that have a name that starts with a, b, or c from the directory /etc to your current directory?
7. Which command enables you to create a link to he directory /etc in your home directory?
8. What is the safe option to remove a symbolic links to a directory?
9. How do you create a compressed archive of the directories /et and /home an write that archive to /tmp/etchome.tgz?
10. How would you extract the file /etc/passwd from /tmp/etchome.tgz that you have created in the previous step?

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

1. Log in as a user root. In the home directory of root, create one archive file that contains the contents of the /home directory and the /etc directory. Use the name /root/essentials.tar for the archive file.
2. Copy this archive to the /tmp directory. Also create a hard link to this file in the / directory.
3. Rename the file /essentials.tar to **/archive.tar**.
4. Create a symbolic link in the home directory of the user root that refers to /archive.tar. Use the name **link.tar** for the symbolic link.
5. Remove the file /archive.tar and see what happened to the symbolic link. Remove the symbolic link also.
6. Compress the /root/essentials.tar file.

### COMMANDS

* **man 7 hier** - man page for Linux Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS)
* **mount** - displays an overview of all mounted devices by reading the **/proc/mounts** file, where the kernel keeps information about all current mounts and also shows kernel interfaces,
* **df -Th** - designed to show available disk space on mounted devices and includes most of the system mounts
* **findmnt** - shows mounts and the relationships that exist between different mounts and is often used because  the **mount** command output can be overwhelming
* **ls** - lists contents of current directory
* **ls -l** - a long listing, which includes information about file properties such as creation date and permissions
* **ls -a** - all files, including hidden files
* **ls -lrt** - show commands sorted on modification date with the most recently modified files last in the list
* **ls -d** - shows names of directories, not the contents of all directories that match the wildcards that have been used with the **ls** command
* **ls -R** - shows contents of current directory, in addition to all of its subdirectories,
* **cp** - copy command for copying files
* **cp -R** - copy directory and contents recursively
* **cp /\<dir>/.\* /tmp** - copies all files that have a name starting with a dot (hidden files) to /tmp, although it gives an error for hidden directories, because the **-R** option was not used
* **cp -a /\<dir>/ .** - copies the entire directory \<dir> including its contents to the current directory
* **cp -a /\<dir>/. .** - copies all files, regular and hidden, to the current directory
* **mv** - moves (renames) files
* **mv \<file> /\<dir>** - moves \<file>  from current directory to \<dir>
* **mkdir \<dir>; mv \<dir> \<dir2>** - first creates a directory and then movies it into \<dir2>
* **mv \<file> \<file2>** - renames file
* **rm** - delete files
* **rm -r \<dir>** - delete directory and its contents
* **rm -f** - force deletion with no confirmation prompt
* **ln /etc/\<file> .** - Creates a link to the file /etc/\<file> in the current directory
* **ln -s /etc/\<file> .** - creates a symbolic link to the file /etc/\<file> in the current directory
* **ln -s /\<dir> /\<dir2>** - creates a symbolic link to the directory /\<dir> in the directory /\<dir2>
* **\ls -l** - list command to show status of links, symbolic or hard
* **tar** - command used to archive files
* **tar -cf \<archivename>.tar /\<files to archive>** - archive files
* **tar -rvf \<archive> \<file or directory to add>** - add files or directories to \<archive>
* **tar -uvf \<archive> \<file or directory to update>** - if file already in archive and since updated, update the archived file
* **tar -tvf \<archive>** - see contents of archive
* **tar -xvf \<archive>** - extract contents of archive
* **tar -xvf \<archive> -C \<location>** - extract contents of archive to \<location>
* **tar -xvf \<archive> \<file to extract>** - extract single file out of archive