### Working with Text Files

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which command was developed to show only the first ten lines in a text file?
    1. **head**
    2. **top**
    3. **first**
    4. **cat**
2. Which command enables you to count the number of words in a text file?
    1. **count**
    2. **list**
    3. **ls -l**
    4. **wc**
3. Which key on your keyboard do you use in **less* to go to the last line of the current text file?
    1. End
    2. Page Down
    3. q
    4. G
4. Which option is missing (...) from the following command, assuming that you want to filter the first field out of the /etc/passwd file and assuming that the character that is used as the field delimiter is a:?
    1. **-d**
    2. **-c**
    3. **-t**
    4. **-x**
5. Which option is missing (...) if you want to sort the third column of the out of the command **ps aux**? ps aux | sort ..
    1. **-k3**
    2. **-c**
    3. **-t**
    4. **-x**
6. Which of the following commands would only show lines in the file /etc/passwd that start with the text _anna_?
    1. **grep anna /etc/passwd**
    2. **grep -v anna /etc/passwd**
    3. **grep $anna /etc/passwd**
    4. **grep ^anna /etc/passwd**
7. Which regular expression do you use to make the previous character optional?
    1. ?
    2. .
    3. *
    4. &
8. Which regular expression is used as a wildcard to refer to any single character?
    1. ?
    2. .
    3. *
    4. &
9. Which command prints the fourth field of a line in the /etc/passwd file if the text _user__ occurs in that line?
    1. **awk '/user/ { print $4 }' /etc/passwd**
    2. **awk -d : '/user/ { print $4 }' /etc/passwd**
    3. **awk -F : '/user/ $4' /etc/passwd**
    4. **awk -F : '/user/ { print $4 }' /etc/passwd**
10. Which option would you use with **grep** to show only lines that do _not_ contain the regular expressions that was used?
    1. **-x**
    2. **-v**
    3. **-u**
    4. **-q**

#### Foundation Topics

#### Using Common Text File-Related Tools

Command | Explanation
--------------- | ---------
**less** | Opens the text file in a pager, which allows for easier reading
**cat** | Dumps the contents of the text file on the screen
**head** | Shows the first ten lines of a text file
**tail** | Shows the last ten lines of a text file
**cut** | Used to filter specific columns or characters from a text file
**sort** | Sorts the contents of a text file
**wc** | Counts the number of lines words, and characters in a file

##### Doing More with less

See **COMMANDS**

##### Showing File Contents with cat

See **COMMANDS**

##### Displaying the First or Last Lines of a File with head and tail

* **head -n 5 /etc/passwd** - show first 5 lines in **/etc/passwd**
* **tail -n 2 /etc/passwd** - show last two lines of **/etc/passwd**
* **head -n 5 /etc/passwd | tail -n 1** - show only line number 5 of **/etc/passwd**

##### Filtering Specific Columns with cut

* **cut -f 1 -d : /etc/passwd** - filter out first field of **/etc/passwd**

##### Sorting File Contents and Output with sort

**sort** sorts in byte order.

Use **sort -n** to sort in numeric order.

Use **sort -rn** to sort by size.

##### Counting Lines, Words, and Characters with wc

See **COMMANDS**

#### A Primer Using Regular Expressions

See **COMMANDS**

##### Using Line Anchors

See **COMMANDS**

##### Using Escaping in Regular Expressions

Best to use escape characters when using **grep**.

##### Using Wildcards and Multipliers

Regular Expression | Use
--------------- | ---------
**^text** | Matches line that starts with specified text
**text$** | Matches line that ends with specified text
**.** | Wildcard (matches any single character)
**[abc]** | Matches a, b, or c
**\*** | Matches zero to an infinite number of previous character
**\\{2\\}** | Matches exactly 2 of the previous character
**\\{1, 3\\}** | Matches a minimum of one and a maximum of three of the previous character
**?** | Matches zero or one of the previous character. 

#### Using grep to Analyze Text

Option | Use
------- | -------
**-i** | Not case sensitive. Matches upper- and lowercase letters.
**-v** | Only matches lines that do _not_ contain the regular expression.
**-r** | Searches files in current directory and subdirectories.
**-e** | Searches for lines matching more than one regular expression.
**-A \<number>** | Shows \<number> of lines after the matching regular expression.
**-B \<number>** | Shows \<number> of lines before the matching regular expression.

#### Working with Other Useful Text Processing Utilities

**awk** and **sed**

See **COMMANDS**

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Key Terms** regular expression, pager, escaping, wildcard, multiplier, line anchor

#### Review Questions

1. Which command enables you to see the results of the **ps aux** command in a way that you can easily browse up and down in the results?
2. Which command enables you to show the last five lines from ~/samplefile?
3. Which command do you use if you want to know how many words are in ~/samplefile?
4. After opening command output using **tail -f ~/mylogfile**, how do you stop showing output?
5. Which **grep** option do you use to exclude all lines that start with either a # or a ;?
6. Which regular expression do you use to match one or more the preceding character?
7. Which **grep** command enables you to see _text_ as well as _TEXT_ in a file?
8. Which **grep** command enables you to show all lines starting with _PATH_, as well as the five lines just before that line?
9. Which **sed** commdn do you use to show line 9 from ~/samplefile?
10. Which command enables you to replace the word _user_ with the word _users_ in ~/samplefile?

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

1. Describe two ways to show line 5 from the /etc/passwd file.
2. How would you locate all text files on your server that contain the current IP address? Do you need a regular expression to do this?
3. You have just used the **sed** command that replaces all occurrences of the text _Administrator_ with _root_. Your Windows administrators do not like that very much. How do you revert?
4. Assuming that in the **ps aux** command the fifth line contains information about memory utilization, how would you process the output of that command to show the process that has the heaviest memory utilization first in the results list?
5. Which command enables you to filter the sixth column of **ps aux** output?
6. How do you delete the sixth line from the file ~/myfile?

### COMMANDS
* **less** - **/\<search>** for forward search and **?\<search>** for backward search
* **more -p \<file>** - prevents **more** from ending when EOF reached
* **tac \<file>** - same as cat, except starts at bottom
* **tail -n 5 /etc/passwd** - show last 5 lines of **\/etc/passwd**
* **tail -5 /etc/passwd** - same as above
* **tail -f \<file>** - updates as file is updated
**cut -f 1 -d : \<file>** - filter out first field of **\<file>**
* **cut -f 1 -d : \<file> | sort** - filter out first field of **\<file>** and **sort** it
* **sort -k3 -t : \<file>** - uses field separator **:** to sort  the  third column of \<file>
* **wc** - displays number of lines, number of words, and number of characters
* **ps aux | wc** 
* **grep \<user> /etc/passwd** - return all strings containing **\<user>**
* **grep ^\<string> \<file>** - search file for lines that start with **\<string>**
* **grep \<string>$ \<file>** - search file for lines that end with **\<string>**
* **grep -i** - not case sensitive
* **grep -v** - matches lines that do _not_ contain regex
* **grep -r** - search directory and subdirectories
* **grep -e** - search for lines matching more than one regex
* **grep -A \<number>** - show \<number> of lines after the matching regex
* **grep -B \<number>** - shows \<number> of lines before the matching regex
* **grep '^#' /etc/sysconfig/sshd** - shows lines in ssh that start with '#'
* **grep -v '^#' /etc/sysconfig/sshd** - shows lines in ssh that do _not_ start with #
* **grep -v '^#' /etc/sysconfig sshd -B 5** - shows five lines directly before each line that do not start with '#' but does not show line that starts with '#'
* **grep -v -e '^#' -e '^$' /etc/sysconfig/sshd** - excludes all blank lines and lines that start with '#'
* **awk -F : '{ print $4 }' /etc/passwd** - shows fourth line of **/etc/passwd**
* **awk -F : '/user/ { print $4 }' /etc/passwd** - searches file for text _user_ and prints the fourth field of any matching line
* **sed -i -e '2d;20;25d' \<file>** - deletes lines 2 and 20 through 25 from \<file>