## User and Group Management

### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which statement about privileged users (root) is true?
    1. A privileged user is a user who has access to a Linux system.
    2. A privileged user with no access permissions can do nothing at all.
    3. Privileged users are not restricted in any way.
    4. On every server, at least one privileged user must be manually created while installing the server.
2. On a default installation of an RHEL 8 server, which group does the user typically need to be a member of to be able to use sudo to run all administration commands?
    1. admin
    2. root
    3. sys
    4. wheel
3. There are different ways that users can run tasks with root permissions. Which of the following is not one of them?
    1. **sudo**
    2. **runas**
    3. **su**
    4. PolicyKit
4. Which of the following is used to store the hash of the user's encrypted password?
    1. **/etc/passwd**
    2. **/etc/shadow**
    3. **/etc/users**
    4. **/etc/secure**
5. Which configuration file should you change to set the default location for all new user home directories?
    1. **/etc/login.defaults**
    2. **/etc/login.defs**
    3. **/etc/default/useradd**
    4. **/etc/default/login.defs**
6. Which command enables you to get information about password properties such as password expiry?
    1. **chage -l**
    2. **usermod --show**
    3. **passwd -l**
    4. **chage --show**
7. Which of the following files is not processed when a user starts a login shell?
    1. **/etc/profile**
    2. **/etc/.profile**
    3. **~/.bashrc**
    4. **~/.bash_profile**
8. Which utility can be used to edit group membership directly through the appropriate configuration file?
    1. **vigr**
    2. **vipw**
    3. **vipasswd**
    4. **usermod**
9. Which command can be used to list all groups a user is a member of?
    1. **userlist**
    2. **grouplist**
    3. **id**
    4. **groups**
10. What can you do to ensure that no users, except for the user root, can log in temporarily?
    1. Set the default shell to **/usr/sbin/nologin**
    2. Set the default shell to **/bin/false**
    3. Create a file with the name **/etc/nologin**
    4. Create a file with name **/etc/nologin.txt**

### End-of-Chapter-Labs

#### Lab 6.1
* Create  two groups: sales and account.
* Create users bob, betty, bill and beatrix. Make sure they have  their primary group set to a private group that has the name of the user.
* Make bob and betty members of the group sales, and bill and beatrix members of the group account.
* Set a password policy that requires users to change their password every 90 days.

### Review Questions

1. What is the UID of user root?
2. What is the configuration file in which **sudo** is defined?
3. Which command should you use to modify a **sudo** configuration?
4. Which two files can be used to define settings that will be used when creating users?
5. How many groups can you create in **/etc/passwd**?
6. If you want to grant a user access to all admin commands through **sudo**, which group should you make that user a member of?
7. Which command should you use to modify the **/etc/group** file manually?
8. Which two commands can you use to change user password information?
9. What is the name of the file where user passwords are stored?
10. What is the name of the file where group accounts are stored?

### Foundation Topics

##### Methods to Run Tasks with Elevated Permissions

Method | Description
--------------- | ---------
**su** | Opens a subshell as a different user, with the advantage that commands are executed as root only in the subshell
**sudo** | Enables you to set up an environment where specific tasks are executed with administrative privileges
PolicyKit | Enables you to set up graphical utilities to run with administrative privileges

##### Adding \<user> to sudoers
1. **usermod -aG wheel user**
2. **visudo** - check line %wheel ALL...

##### 7 fields of /etc/passwd <user> configuration
1. username
2. password
3. UID
4. GID
5. Comment field (GECOS field)
6. Directory
7. Shell

##### 9 fields of /etc/shadow <user> configuration
1. login name
2. encrypted password
3. days since Jan 1 1970 that password was last changed
4. days before password may be changed
5. days after which password must be changed
6. days before password is to expire that user is warned
7. days after password expires that account is disabled
8. days since Jan 1 1970 that account is disabled
9. a reserved field 

##### 5 fields of /etc/login.defs
1. **MOTD_FILE**
2. **ENV_PTH** - defines $PATH variable, a list of directories searched for executable files
3. **PASS_MAX_DAYS**, **PASS_MIN_DAYS**, and **PASS_WARN_AGE**
4. **UID_MIN**
5. **CREATE_HOME** - indicates whether or not to create homes

##### 4 Files for Creating a User Environment
1. **/etc/profile** - default settings for all users when starting a login shell
2. **/etc/bashrc** - default settings for all users when starting a subshell
3. **~/.profile** - specific settings for one user applied when starting a login shell
4. **~/.bashrc** - specific settings for one user applied when starting a subshell

Files are read in above order. If variable or setting occurs in more than one file, the last one wins.

##### 4 fields /etc/group
1. group name
2. group password - rarely used anymore
3. group ID
4. members - does not show users who are a member of this group as their primary group

### COMMANDS
* **id \<user>**
* **su**
* **su -**
* **su - \<user>**
* **useradd \<user>**
* **usermod -aG wheel \<user>**
* **usermod -aG \<group> \<user>**
* **visudo**
* **userdel \<user>**
* **userdel -r \<user>**
* **vipw**
* **vipw -s**
* **vigr**
* **useradd -m -u \<UID> -G \<group A>,\<groupB> \<user>**
* **usermod**
* **passwd**
* **chage**
* **passwd -n 30 -w 3 -x 90 linda** - sets password for user linda to minimal usage period of 30 days, expiry after 90 days, warning generated 3 days before
* **chage -l** - see current password settings
* **chage -E 2020-12-31 bob** - account for bob expires on Dec 31 2020
* **for i in lucy lori bob do useradd $i done**
* **grep \<newuser> /etc/password /etc/shadow /etc/group**
* **groupadd**
* **vigr**
* **groupmod**
* **groupmems** 
* **groupmems -g sales -l** - see which users are members of the sales group


### LOCATIONS
* **/etc/passwd**
* **/etc/shadow**
* **/etc/skel**
* **/etc/skel/.bash_profile**
* **/etc/skel/.bash_logout**
* **/etc/skel/.bashrc**
* **/etc/default/useradd**
* **/etc/login.defs**
* **/etc/group**
* **/etc/gshadow**