## Permission Management

### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. A user needs to work in a session where all new files that he creates will be group-owned by the group sales, until the session is closed. Which command would do that?
    1. **chgrp sales**
    2. **setgid sales**
    3. **newgrp sales**
    4. **setgroup sales**
2. Which command enables you to find all files on a system that are owned by user linda?
    1. **find / -user linda**
    2. **find / -uid linda**
    3. **ls -l | grep linda**
    4. **ls -R | find linda**
3. Which command does not set group ownership to the group sales fo the file myfile?
    1. **chgrp sales myfile**
    2. **chown .sales myfile**
    3. **chgrp myfiles sales**
    4. **chown :sales myfile**
4. Which command would be used to allow read and write permissions to the user and group owners and no permissions at all to anyone else?
    1. **chown 007 filename**
    2. **chmod 077 filename**
    3. **chmod 660 filename**
    4. **chmod 770 filename**
5. Which command enables you to set the SGID permission on a directory?
    1. **chmod u+s /dir**
    2. **chmod g-s /dir**
    3. **chmod g+s /dir**
    4. **chmod 1770 /dir**
6. You are trying to user the **setfacl** command to set ACLs on the directory /data, but you are getting an "operation not supported" message. Which of the following is the most likely explanation?
    1. The **setfacl** command is not installed on your computer.
    2. You are making an error typing the command.
    3. The user or group to which you want to grant ACLs does not exist.
    4. The file system lacks ACL support.
7. Which command grants rw permissions for he group sales to all new files that will be created in the /data directory and all of its subdirectories?
    1. **setfacl -m d:g:sales:rw / data**
    2. **setfacl -m d:g:sales:rwx / data**
    3. **setfacl -R -m g:sales:rwx /data**
    4. **setfacl -R -m g:sales:rw /data**
8. Which command enables you to make sure that others have no access to any new files that will be created in the /data directory, assuming that you want others to have read permissions on all other files?
    1. **setfacl -m d:o::- /data**
    2. **setfacl -m o::- /data**
    3. **umask 027 /data**
    4. **umask 027**
9. Which of the following umask settings meets the following requirements:
* Grants all permissions to the owner of the file.
* Grants read permissions to the group owner of the  file.
* Grants no permissions to others.<br>
    1. 740
    2. 750
    3. 027
    4. 047
10. Which command enables you to check all attributes that are currently set on myfile?
    1. **ls --attr myfile**
    2. **getattr myfile**
    3. **lsattr myfile**
    4. **listattr myfile**

### Foundation Topics

##### Managing File Ownership

##### Displaying Ownership

* On Linux, every file and every directory has two owners: a user owner and a group owner.
* Collectively, the user, group, and others (ugo) owners are shown when listing permissions with the **ls -l** command.

##### 5 steps for shell to determine ownership
1. Is the current user the user owner of the file?
2. Has the current user obtained permissions through user-assigned ACLs.
3. Is the current user a member of the group owner (group of the file).
4. Has the current user obtained any permissions through a group ACL?
5. If current user is not owner, nor group owner, nor has current owner obtained ACL permissions, current user receives permissions of others entity.

##### 2 ways to change group ownership
1. With **chown** command, use **.** or **:** in front of group name.
2. Use **chgrp** command.

##### Understanding Default Ownership

When a user creates a file, the user automatically becomes the user owner by default and that user's primary group becomes the group owner. 

Normally, this is the group set in **/etc/passwd** as the user's primary group.

If the current user \<user> wants to change the effective primary group, use **newgrp** command, followed by name of group to set as effective primary group. This group will remain effective primary group until user exits the shell. All files created during this session will receive this "temporary" effective group as group owner.

##### Managing Basic Permissions

##### Understanding Read, Write, and Execute Permissions

* The 3 basic permissions allow users to read, write, and execute files. 
* The effect of these permissions differs when applied to files or directories.
* With **read file** access, a user may read a file.
* With **read directory** access, a user may list contents of that directory. _*However*_, this does not grant a user **read file** access in that directory, as well. The Linux permission system does not know inheritance.
* The **write file** permission allows a user to write in file. However, a user may not create or delete new files.
* The **write directory** permission allows a user to create or delete files in a directory. Also, a user may create and remove new subdirectories.
* The **execute file** permission allows a user to run a program file.
* The **execute directory** permission allows a user to **cd** into that directory.

##### Applying Read, Write, and Execute Permissions

##### Absolute Mode & Relative Mode

Permission | Numeric Representation
--------------- | ---------
**read** | 4
**write** | 2
**execute** | 1

##### Managing Advanced Permissions

##### Understanding Advanced Permissions

There are 3 advanced permissions:
1. **Set the user ID (SUID)**
2. **Set the group ID (SGID)**
3. **Sticky Bit** - permission used to protect files against accidental deletion in an environment where users have write permissions in the same directory.

The SUID permission can be verified with command **ls -l**. If user **x** position is **s** instead, the SUID permission is active.

Same for SGID permission, except in the group **x** permission. SGID permission allows users in a group to share access files so that each user's primary group does not prevent other users' access when a user creates a file.

Sticky bit prevents users from deleting each other's files in a shared group environment. If stick bit is set, a user user can delete files only if either 1) user is owner of file or 2) user is owner of directory where file exists.

##### Applying Advanced Permissions

Permission | Numeric Representation | Relative Value | On Files | On Directories
---------- | ---------------------- | -------------- | -------- | ---------------
**read** | 4 | **u+s** | User executes file with permissions of file owner | No meaning
**write** | 2 | **g+s** | User executes file with permissions of group owner | Files created in directory get the same group owner
**execute** | 1 | **+t** | No meaning | Prevents users from deleting files from other users

Examples:
* **chmod 2755 \/\<directory>** - add SGID to a directory and sets rwx for user and rx for group and others

##### Managing ACLs

##### Understanding ACLs

Previous versions of **tar** utility did not support with ACLs which is why the **start** utility was introduced.

Use **getfacl** to create a backup of ACLs.

use **setfacl** to restore the backup ACLs.

##### Working with Default ACLs

If you want to use ACLs to configure access for multiple users or groups to the same directory, set ACLs twice. First user **setfacl -R -m** to modify ACLs for current files. Use **setfacl -m d:** to take care of new items that will be created also. 

##### Setting Default Permissions with umask

When creating a file or directory, default permissions are determined by the **umask** setting.

There are two ways to change the **umask** setting: for all users and for individual users.

For all users, make sure the umask setting is considered when starting the shell environment files as directed by /etc/profile. The right approach is to create a shell script in the /etc/profile.d directory and specify the umask in that script.

For individual users, change umask settings in a file with the name .profile which is created in the home directory of an individual user.

Value | Applied to Files | Applied to Directories
---------- | ---------------------- | -------------- |
0 | Read and write | Everything | 
1 | Read and write | Read and write |
2 | Read | Read and execute  
3 | Read | Read |
4 | Write | Write and execute |
5 | Write | Write | 
6 | Nothing | Execute |
7 | Nothing | Nothing |

##### Working with User-Extended Attributes

As is the case for ACLs, for file attributes a **mount** option, **user_xattr**, may have to be enabled. If you receive an "operation not supported" message while working with user-extended attributes, make sure to set this **mount** option in the **/etc/fstab** file.

* **A** - ensures that file access time of the file is not modified
* **a** - allows a file to be added to but no be removed
* **c** - ensures a file is compressed the first time the compression engine becomes active (if using a file system where volume level compression is supported)
* **D** - ensures that changes to files are written to disk immediately and not to cache first
* **d** - ensures that file is not backed up in backups where the **dump** utility is used
* **I** - enables indexing for the directory where it is enabled, allows faster file access for primitive file systems like Ext3 that do not use B-tree database for fast access
I **j** - ensures that on an Ext3 file system the file is first written to journal
* **s** - overwrites the blocks where the file was stored with 0s after the file has been deleted
* **u** saves undelete information, to be used with other utility to salvage deleted files

### End-of-Chapter-Labs

#### Lab 7.1

1. Set up a shared group environment. Create two directories: /data/account and /data/sales. Make the group sales the owner of the directory sales, and make the group account the owner of the directory account.
2. Configure the permissions so that the user owner (which must be root) and group owner have fulls access to the directory. There should be no permissions assigned to the others entity. Also make sure that "others" will get no permissions on newly created files and directories within the entire /data structure.
3. Create a configuration that allows members of the group sales to read files in the directory /data/account. Also make sure that members of the group account have read permissions in the directory /data/sales.
4. Ensure that all new files in both directories inherit the group owner of their respective directory. This means that all files that will be created in /data/sales will be owned by the group sales, and all files in /data/account will be owned by the group account.
5. Ensure that users are only allowed to remove files of which they are the owner.

### Review Questions

1. How do you use **chown** to set the group owner to a file?
2. Which command finds all files that are owned by a specific user?
3. How would you apply read, write, and execute permissions to all files in /data for the user and group owners while setting no permissions for others?
4. Which command enables you in relative permissions mode to add the execuite permissions to a file that you want to make executable?
5. Which command enables you to ensure that group ownership of all new files that will be created in a directory is set to the group owner of that directory?
6. You want to ensure that users can only delete files of which they are the owner, or files that are in a directory of which they are the owner. Which command will do that for you?
7. Which command adds an ACL that grants members of the group sales read permissions to all existing files in the current directory? 
8. What do you need to do to ensure that members of the group sales get read permissions to all files in the current directory and all of its subdirectories, as well as all files that will be created in this directory in the future?
9. Which umask do you need to set if you never want "others" to get any permissions on new files?
10. Which command ensures that nobody can delete myfile by accident?

### COMMANDS
* **ls -l**
* **find / -user \<user>** - retrieve list of all files on system owned by given user
* **find / -group \<group>** - retrieve list of all files on system owned by given group
* **chown \<user> \<file>** - changes ownership for file to user
* **chown -R \<user> \<directory>\/\<subdirectory>** - recursively change ownership of current directory and files and / or subdirectories
* **chown .\<group> \<file>**
* **chown \<user> \<file>** - sets \<user> as owner of \<file>
* **chown \<user>.\<group> \<file>** - sets \<user> as user owner and \<group> as group owner 
* **chown \<user>:\<group> \<file>** - sets \<user> as user owner and \<group> as group owner
* **chown .\<group> \<file>** - sets \<group> as group owner of \<file> without changing user owner
* **chown -R :\<group> \<file>** - sets \<group> as group owner of \<file> without changing user owner
* **chgrp** - change group ownership, much like **chown**
* **groups \<user>**
* **chmod +x \<file>** - add execute permissions for all users
* **chmod g+w, o-r \<file>** - add write permission to group and remove read for others
* **chmod -R o+rx \/\<directory>** - set execute permissions on all directories as well as files in /\<directory>
* **chmod -R o+rX \/\<directory>** - set execute permissions on directories only in /\<directory> 
* **chmod u+s \/\<directory>** - SUID for a directory
* **chmod g+s \/\<directory>** - SGID for a directory
* **chmod +t \/\<directory>** - sticky bit for directory
* **getfacl \/\<directory>** - see current ACL settings
* **setfacl -m g:sales:rx \/\<directory>** - **m**odify the current ACL settings so that **g**roup **sales** has **r**ead and e**x**ecute permissions
* **setfacl -m u:\<user>:- /tmp/\<file>** - takes away all permissions of \<user>
* **setfacl -m u:\<user>:r- /tmp/\<file>** - takes away all permissions of \<user> except **read**
* **setfacl -m u:\<user>:x- /tmp/\<file>** - takes away all permissions of \<user> except **execute**
* **setfacl -m u:\<user>:w- /tmp/\<file>** - takes away all permissions of \<user> except **write**
* **setfacl -m g:\<group>:- /tmp/\<file>** - takes away all permissions of \<group>
* **setfacl -m g:\<group>:r- /tmp/\<file>** - takes away all permissions of \<group> except **read**
* **setfacl -m g:\<group>:x- /tmp/\<file>** - takes away all permissions of \<group> except **execute**
* **setfacl -m g:\<group>:w- /tmp/\<file>** - takes away all permissions of \<group> except **write**
* **chattr +s \<file>** - applies attributes to \<file>
* **chattr -s \<file>** - removes attributes to \<file>

### LOCATIONS

* **/etc/profile** - shell environment settings for user
* **/etc/fstab** - for mount options

