### Configuring Networking

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which of the following IP addresses belong to the same network?
    1. 192.168.4.17/26
    2. 192.168.4.94/26
    3. 192.168.4.97/26
    4. 192.168.4.120/26
2. Which of the following is not a private IP address?
    1. 10.10.10.10
    2. 169.254.11.23
    3. 172.19.18.17
    4. 192.168.192.192
3. Which of the following would be the default network interface name on a RHEL 8 system?
    1. p6p1
    2. eth0
    3. eno1677783
    4. e0
4. Which command shows the recommended way to display information about the network interface as well as its IP configuration?
    1. **ifconfig -all**
    2. **ipconfig**
    3. **ip link show**
    4. **ip addr show**
5. Which statement about NetworkManager is _not_ true?
    1. It is safe to disable NetworkManager and work with the network service instead.
    2. NewtorkManager manages network connections that are applied to network interfaces.
    3. NetworkManager has a  text-based user interface with the name **nmtui**.
    4. NetworkManager is the default service to manage networking in RHEL 8.
6. Which man page contains excellent examples on **nmcli** usage?
    1. nmcli
    2. nmcli-examples
    3. nm-config
    4. nm-tools
7. Which of the following is the name of the text user interface to specify network connection properties?
    1. system-config-network
    2. system-config-networkmanager
    3. nmtui
    4. nmcli
8. Which of the following commands shows correct syntax to set a fixed IP address to a connection using **nmcli**?
    1. **nmcli con add con-name "static" ifname eth0 autoconnect no type ethernet ipv4 10.0.0.10/24 gw4 10.0.0.1**
    2. **nmcli con add con-name "static" ifname eth0 autoconnect no type ethernet ipv4 10.0.0.10/24 gwv4 10.0.0.1**
    3. **nmcli con add con-name "static" ifname eth0 type ethernet ipv4 10.0.0.10/24 gw4 10.0.0.1**
    4. **nmcli con add con-name "static" ifname eth0 autoconnect no type ethernet ip4 10.0.0.10/24 gw4 10.0.0.1**
9. Which of the following is _not_ a recommended way to specify which DNS servers to use?
    1. Edit /etc/resolve.conf
    2. Set the DNS options in /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifcfg-\<ID>
    3. Set the DNS server names using **nmcli**
    4. Use **nmtui** to set the DNS server names
10. In which configuration file would you set the hostname?
    1. /etc/sysconfig/network
    2. /etc/sysconfig/hostname
    3. /etc/hostname
    4. /etc/defaults/hostname

#### Foundation Topics

#### Networking Fundamentals

* IPv4 addresses - 32-bit address of four octets
* IPv6 addresses - 128-bit addresses written in eight groups of hexadecimal numbers that are 16 bits each

##### IP Addresses

Every IP address belongs to a specific network.

To communicate with computers on other networks, a router is used.

Unique IP addressses are scarce. 

Private network addresses are used in internal networks only.

* 10.0.0.0/8 (a single Class A network)
* 172.16.0.0/12 (16 Class B networks)
* 192.168.0.0/16 (256 Class C networks)

Network Address Translation (NAT) used on router that connects private network to Internet.

##### IPv6 Addresses

Example: **02fb:0000:0000:0000:90ff:fe23:8998:1234**

0s can be omitted. So the above address may be written as **2fb::90ff:fe23:8998:1234**

##### Network Masks

##### Binary Notation

##### MAC Addresses

Each network card also has a 12-byte MAC address.

MAC addresses are for use on the local network (that is, the local physical network or local WLAN, just up to the first router) - they cannot be used for communication between nodes on different networks.

Each MAC address consists of two parts.
1. The first 6 bytes is the vendor ID.
2. The second 6 bytes is the unique node ID.

##### Protocols and Ports

Services (running on nodes) each have dedicated ports, such as 80 for HTTP or 22 for SSH.

Different protocol may be used for different services, because not all services are addressed the same way. These include TCP, UDP, and ICMP.

#### Managing Network Addresses and Interfaces

Network addresses can be assigned in two ways:
1. **Fixed IP addresses** - useful for servers  that always need to be available at same IP address
2. **Dynamically assigned IP addresses** - useful for end users' devices and for instances in cloud environment

To dynamically assign IP addresses, a Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) server is typically used.

In RHEL 8, the default names for network cards are based on firmware, device topology and device types.

Network card names always consist of the following:
1. Ethernet interfaces begin with _en_, WLAN interfaces begin with _wl_ and WWAN interfaces begin with _ww_.
2. Type of adapter, an _o_ is used for onboard, _s_ is for hotplug slot, _p_ is for PCI location, and _x_ to create a device name that is based on the MAC address of the network card.
3. Number used to represent index, ID, or port.
4. If fixed named cannot be determined, traditional names such as eth0 are used.

#### Validating Network Configuration

How to check the following network items:
* IP address and subnet mask
* Routing
* Availability of ports and services

##### Validating Network Address Configuration

Use **ip** to verify network address configuration. 

Do not use **ifconfig** utility.

**ip addr show**

The loopback interface is used for communication between processes. Some processes use the IP protocol for internal communication, so you'll always find a loopback interface and the IP address of the loopback interface is always set to 127.0.0.1.

The interface for the ethernet card typically has the following:
1. **Current state** - should be UP
2. **MAC address configuration** - unique MAC address set for every network card
3. **IPv4 configuration** - current IP address
4. **IPv6 configuration** - current IPv6 address

**ip link show**

Use this command to check link state of network interfaces.

Use **ip -s link**  to check packet transmissions stats.


##### Validating Routing

Every network has at least one router (also called default gateway).

**ip route show**

Shows default router.

Example output:

```
[root@server1 ~]# ip route show
default via 192.168.4.2 dev ens33 proto dhcp metric 100
192.168.4.0/24 dev ens33 proto kernel scope link src 192.168.4.210 metric 100
192.168.122.0/24 dev virbr0 proto kernel scope link src 192.168.122.1 linkdown
```
Default route goes through **192.168.4.2**. Network interface **ens33** used to address that IP address. And default route was assigned by DHCP server.

##### Validating the Availability of Ports and Services

**ss -lt** = **netstat -l --tcp**

#### Configuring Network Configuration with nmtui and nmcli

RHEL 8 is managed by NetworkManager service.

NetworkManager reads network card configuration scripts for current status.

Difference between a device and a connection:
* A device is a network interface card.
* A connection is the configuration that is used on a device.

There may be multiple connections for a device.

Switching between connections on devices is common for end-user computers, less so for servers.

##### Required Permissions to Change Network Configuration

Ordinary users are able to make changes to the network configuration. Users should be able to connect their local system to a network.

Regular users that have used **ssh** to connect to a server are not allowed  to change the network configuration.

##### Configuring the Network with nmcli

Everything done with **ip** command is non-persistent. 

For _persistent_ configuration changes, use **nmtui** or **nmcli**.

Be sure to distinguish between device and connection.

##### Configuring the Network with nmtui

**nmtui** is a text user interface.

**nmtui** consists of 3 menu options:
* **Edit a Connection**
* **Activate a Connection**
* **Set System Hostname**

When editing a connection, user must deactivate it and then reactivate it.

**nm-connection-editor** is a GUI option but options are restricted compared to **nmtui**.

##### Working on network Configuration Files

If you prefer not to make modifications using **nmcli** or **nmtui**, you may directly edit configuration files instead. These are in **/etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/** and start with **ifcfg-**.

Remember to **nmcli con up** to activate the new configuration.

#### Setting Up Hostname and Name Resolution

##### Hostnames

FQDN - fully qualified domain name (such as server1.example.com)

Good practice to always specify an FQDN, not just a hostname.

Different ways to change hostname:
* Use **nmtui** and select option **Change Hostname**.
* Use **hostnamectl set-hostname**.
* Edit contents of configuration file **/etc/hostname**.

Configuring a DNS server is not an RHCSA objective, but you need to know how to configure server to use an existing DNS server for hostname resolution. This may be done in **/etc/hosts** file.

```
[root@server2 ~]# cat /etc/hosts
10.0.0.10 server1.example.com server1
10.0.0.20 server2.example.com server2
```
First column is IP address of specific host, second column may contain the FQDN, and third column contain an alias.

##### DNS Name Resolution

In order to communicate with other hosts on the Internet, using **/etc/hosts** is not enough. Must also use DNS. 

To specify which DNS server should be used, set the DNS server using **nmcli** or **nmtui**.

Recommended to set up at least two DNS name servers to be contacted.

To specify DNS name server, you may use the following:
* Use **nmtui** to set the DNS name servers.
* set DNS1 and DNS2 parameters in the ifcfg network connection configuration file in **/etc/sysconfig/network-scripts**.
* Use DHCP server that is configured to hand out the address of the DNS name server.
* Use **nmcli con mod \<connection-id> [+]ipv4.dns \<ip-of-dns>**.

If computer is configured using DHCP server, the DNS server is also set via DHCP server.

If you do not want to use DHCP server to set DNS name server, you have 2 options:
1. Edit the ifcfg configuration file to include option **PEERDNS=no**.
2. Use **nmcli con mod \<connection> ipv4.ignore-auto-dns yes**.

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Key Terms** IP, IPv4, Ipv6, protocol, port, subnet mask, DNS, DHCP, connection, interface, FQDN

#### Review Questions

1. What is the network address in the address 213.214.215.99/29?
2. Which command only shows link status and not the IP address?
3. Which services manages network configuration in RHEL 8?
4. Which file contains the hostname in RHEL 8?
5. Which command enables you to set the hostname in an easy way?
6. Which command do you need to run after manually changing the contents of the /etc/sysconfig/ifcfg files?
7. Which configuration file can you change to enable hostname resolution for a specific IP address?
8. Which command shows the current routing configuration?
9. How do you verify the current status of the NetworkManager service?
10. Which command enables you to change the current IP address and default gateway on your network connection?

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

1. Set up the first server to use the FQDN **server1.example.com**. Set up the second server to use **server2.example.com**.
2. On server1.example.com, use **nmtui** and configure your primary network card to automatically get an IP address through DHCP. Also set a fixed IP address to **192.168.4.210**. On server2, set the fixed IP address to **192.168.4.22**.
3. Make sure that from server1 you can ping server2 and vice versa.
4. To allow you  to access servers on the Internet, make sure that your local DHCP server provides the default router and DNS servers.

### COMMANDS
* **ip** - verify network address configuration
* **ip addr** - configure and monitor network addresses
* **ip addr show** - show current network settings
* **ip link** - configure and monitor network link state
* **ip -s link show** - current link statistics, i.e., packets transmitted and received as well as errors during packet transmission
* **ip link set** - bring up link state if it is down
* **ip link set dev \<devicename> up** - bring up device if down
* **ip link set dev \<devicename> down** - bring down device if up
* **ip route** - configure and monitor routing information
* **ip  route show** - check default router
* **netstat** - port availability
* **ss -lt** - see all listening TCP ports on local system
* **ping -c 4 8.8.8.8** send four packets to IP 8.8.8.8, if Internet is up, should get echo reply
* **systemctl status NetworkManager** - verify current status of NetworkManager
* **nmcli gen permissions** - check current network permissions for current user
* **nmcli con show** - show all connections, active _and_ inactive
* **nmcli con show \<connection>** - shows many properties of connection
* **man 5 nm-settings** - shows settings for **nmcli**
* **nmcli dev status** - shows settings for all devices
* **nmcli dev show \<device>** - shows settings for specific device
* **nmcli con add con-name \<connection> type ethernet ifname \<device> ipv4.method auto** - creates a new network connection **dhcp**
* **nmcli con add con-name \<connection> ifname \<device> autoconnect no type ethernet ip4 10.0.0.10/24 gw4 10.0.0.1 ipv4.method manual** - creates a new static connection **static** 
* **nmcli con delete \<connection>** - delete connection
* **man nmcli-examples**
* **nmcli con mod \<connection> \<connection-setting> \<value>** - modify \<connection-setting> of \<connection> with updated \<value>
* **hostnamectl status** - get current hostname status
* **hostnamectl set-hostname \<hostname>** - set hostname
* **nmcli con mod \<connection-id> [+]ipv4.dns \<ip-of-dns>** - specify which DNS name servers to use
* **nmcli con mod \<connection> ipv4.ignore-auto-dns yes** - do not allow DHCP server to set DNS server
* **getent hosts \<servername>** - verify hostname resolution

### LOCATIONS

* **/etc/sysconfig/network-scripts** - location of network card configuration scripts, which start with **ifcfg** and followed by name of network card
* **/etc/hosts**