### Managing Software

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which of the following is _not_ a mandatory component in a .repo file that is used to indicate which repositories should be used?
    1. [label]
    2. name=
    3. baseurl=
    4. gpgcheck=
2. Which installation source is used on RHEL if a server is not registered with RHN?
    1. The installation medium is used.
    2. No installation source is used.
    3. The base RHN repository is used, without updates.
    4. You have full access to RHN repositories, but the software you are using is not supported.
3. Which of the following should be used in the .repo file to refer to a repository that is in the directory /repo on the local file system?
    1. file=/repo
    2. baseurl=file://repo
    3. baseurl=file:///repo
    4. file=http:///repo
4. Which of the following is true about GPG-based repository security?
    1. If packages in the repository have been signed, you need to copy the GPG key to the correct location.
    2. GPG package signing is mandatory.
    3. GPG package signatures prevent packages in a repository from being changed.
    4. GPG package signing is recommended on Internet repositories, but not required on local repositories that are for internal use only.
5. Which command enables you to search the package that contains the file semanage?
    1. **yum search semanage**
    2. **yum search all semenage**
    3. **yum provides semanage**
    4. **yum whatprovides \*/semanage**
6. Which YUM module component allows you to work with different versions side by side?
    1. Application profile
    2. Application stream
    3. Module version
    4. RPM group
7. Which of the following commands allows you to install the devel profile of the PHP 7.1 application stream?
    1. **yum module install php:7.1 devel**
    2. **yum module install php:7.1 --devel**
    3. **yum module install php:71/devel**
    4. **yum module install php:7.1@devel**
8. Which command should you use to install an RPM file that has been downloaded to your computer?
    1. **yum install**
    2. **yum localinstall**
    3. **rpm -ivh**
    4. **rpm -Uvh**
9. Which command enables you to find the RPM packages a specific file belongs to?
    1. **rpm -ql /my/file**
    2. **rpm -qlf/my/file**
    3. **rpm -qf /my/file**
    4. **rom -qa /my/file**
10. Which command enables you to analyze whether there are scripts in an RPM package file that you have just downloaded?
    1. **rpm -qs packagename.rpm**
    2. **rpm -qps packagename.rpm**
    3. **rpm -qp --scripts packagename.rpm**
    4. **rpm -q --scripts packagename.rpm**


#### Foundation Topics

#### Managing Software Packages with yum

The default utility used to manage software packages on Red Hat Enterprise Linux is yum, which stands for Yellowdog Updater, Modified.

In this section, you learn how to create and manage repositories and how to manage software packages based on the contents of repositories.

The **yum** and **dnf** command are interrelated and connected to Fedora. Leave it at that.

##### Understanding the Role of Repositories

Software on Red Hat Enterprise Linux is provided in the RPM (Red Hat Package Manager) format.

The maintainer of a repository publishes updated packages in the repository. Whenever you use **yum** to install software, the most recent version of software is automatically used.

The YUM repository system takes care of resolving dependencies automatically. If a package is to be installed, It contains information about the required dependencies.

While installing RHEL 8, it asks you to register with the Red hat Customer Portal, which provides access to different repositories.

If you are using CentOS, you get access to the CentOS repositories and no registration is required.

Repositories are specific to an operating system. Therefore, if you use RHEL, use RHEL repositories only.

If you want to provide additional software from the Fedora project to a RHEL server, you may consider EPEL (Extra Packages for Enterprise Linux). But double-check the packages won't break your current support status.

##### Registering Red Hat Enterprise Linux for Support

To register RHEL, you need a valid entitlement.

This entitlement is associated with your account on the Red Hat Customer Portal.

After obtaining a valid subscription for Red Hat Enterprise Linux, you can use the Red Hat Subscription Management (RHSM) tools to manage your entitlement.

Managing an entitlement involves 4 basic tasks:
* **Register** While registering a subscription you connect it to your current Red Hat account. As a result **subscription-manager** tool can inventory the system.
* **Subscibe** Subscribing your system gives it access to updates for Red Hat products that your subscription is entitled to. You will also receive support.
* **Enable repositories** After subscribing a system, you'll get access to a default set of repositories. 
* **Review and track** You can review and track current subscriptions that are in use.

##### Managing Subscriptions

You can manage subscriptions from either the GNOME graphical interface or from the command line.

The **subscription-manager** tool is used for managing subscriptions from the command line. 

You can use **subscription-manager** in the following ways:
* **Register a system** Type **subscription-manager register** to register.
* **List available subscriptions** Type **subscription-manager list --available** to see what your account is entitled to.
* **Automatically attach a subscription** Registering a server is not enough to get access to the repositories. Use **subscription-manager attach --auto** to automatically attach your subscription to the repositories that are available.
* **Get an overview** To see which subscriptions you're currently using, type **subscription-manager --consumed**.
* **Unregister** If you're going to deprovision a system, use **subscription-manager unregister**. 

See **LOCATIONS**

##### Specifying Which Repository to Use

##### Understanding Repository Security

You install RPM packages with root privileges.

Repositories typically use keys for package signing.

Packages are often signed with a GPG key.

Not necessary to know GPG-signed packages for exam.

##### Creating Your Own Repository

Creating your own repository is not a requirement for RHCSA. 

To create a repository, make sure that all RPM packages are available in the directory you want to use as a repository and then use the command **createrepo** to generate the metadata that enables a user to use that directory as a repository.

#### Using yum

To use repositories, you need the **yum** command. This command enables you to perform several tasks on the repositories.

**Task** | **Explanation**
------- | -------
**search** | Search for the exact name of package
**[what]provides \*/name** | Perform a deep search in the package to look for specific files within the package
**info** | Provides more information about the package
**install** | Install the package
**remove** | Remove the package
**list [all \| installed]** | List all or installed packages
**group list** | List package groups
**group install** | Install all packages from a group
**update** | Update packages specified
**clean all** | Remove all stored metadata 

##### Using yum to Find Software Packages

To install packages with **yum** you need the exact name of the package. Use **yum search** for this.

The **yum search** command gets in touch with the online repositories and downloads the most recent repository metadata to the local machine. Then **yum search** looks in the package name and description for the string you are looking for.

The **yum whatprovides** or **yum provides** command searches packages for a specific file.

##### Getting More Information About Packages

Use **yum info** followed by name of the package to get more information about the package before installing it.

##### Installing and Removing Software Packages

Use command **yum install \<package>** to install a yum package.

To remove package, use **yum remove \<package>**, which will do a dependency analysis and remove all packages that depend on the package being removed.

##### Showing Lists of Packages

Use command **yum list** to show lists of packages.

Use **yum list installed** to see installed packages.

Use **yum list \<package>** to receive information about installed package.

##### _Updating Packages_

When using **yum update** command, current versions of installed packages are compared to the version of these packages in the repositories. You type **y** to install any updates available.

There is one exception. If you use **yum update kernel** command, the kernel package is not updated, but the newer kernel is installed beside the old kernel.

##### _Working with yum Package Groups_

A package group is defined in the repository, and yum offers the group management commands to work with these groups. 

For an overview of groups, use **yum groups list**, which shows environment groups which contain basic functionality.

Within an environment group, different subgroups can be used and these are displayed with **yum groups list hidden**.

Use **yum groups info** for information about groups.

##### _Using yum History_

While working with YUM, all actions are registered. You can use the **yum history** command to get an overview of all actions that have been issued.

Use **yum history undo** followed by the number of the specific action in history to undo that action.

#### Managing Package Module Streams

Red Hat has introduced Package Module Streams to make it easier to work with different versions of packages.

Also, Package Module Streams make it possible to update critical applications more frequently than the bae operating system is updated.

RHEL 8 provides two main repositories to separate core operating system packages from user-space packages: BaseOS and Application Stream.

##### Understanding Modules

In the Application Stream repository, content with varying life cycles is provided. This content is provided as the traditional RPM packages, but also as modules.

A _module_ describes a set of RPM packages that belong together.

Typically modules are organized around a specific version of an application.

Each module can have one or more application streams.

A _stream_ contains one specific version, and updates are provided for a specific stream.

Modules can have one or more profiles. A _profile_ is a list of packages that are installed together for a particular use case.

**Item** | **Explanation**
------- | -------
RPM | The default package format. Contains files as well as metadata that describes how to install the files. Optionally may contain pre- and post-installation scripts.
Module | A delivery mechanism to install RPM packages. In a module different versions and profiles can be provided.
Application stream | A specific version of the module.
Profile | A collection of packages that are installed together for a particular use case.

##### Managing Modules

Use command **yum module list** to see list of modules.

To list specific streams, use **yum module list \<module name>**.

To get information about specific profiles, use **yum module info \<module name>**.

After finding module information, enable a module stream and install modules. Every module has a default module stream, providing access to a specific version.

Use **yum module install** to install packages from the default module stream.

To specify a version, use **yum module install \<specific version>**. This will not be  the default, so type **yum distro-sync** to check dependencies.

#### Managing Software Packages with rpm

##### Understanding RPM Filenames

##### Querying the RPM Database

##### Querying RPM Package Files

##### Using repoquery

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Define Key Terms** YUM, repository, dependency, package, Red Hat Network (RHN), package groups, dependency hell, RPM, module, application stream, application profile





#### Review Questions

1. You have a directory containing a collection of RPM packages and want to make that directory a repository. Which command enables you to do that?
2. What needs to be in the repository file to point to a repository on http://server.example.com/repo?
3. You have just configured a new repository to be used on your RHEL computer. Which command enables you to verify that the repository is indeed available?
4. Which command enables you to search the RPM package containing the file useradd?
5. Which two commands do you need to use to show the name of the yum group that contains security tools and shows what is in that group?
6. Which command do you use to ensure that all PHP-related packages are going to be installed using the older version 5.1, without actually installing anything?
7. You want to make sure that an RPM package that you have downloaded does not contain any dangerous script code. Which command enables you to do so?
8. Which command reveals all documentation in an RPM package?
9. Which command shows the RPM package a file comes from?
10. Which command enables you to query software from the repository?

#### End-of-Chapter Labs

**Lab 9.1**
1. Copy some RPM files from the installation disk to the /myrepo directory. Make this directory a repository and make sure that your server is using this repository.
2. List the repositories currently in use on your server.
3. Search for the package that contains the cache-only DNS name server. Do not install it yet.
4. Perform an extensive query of the package so that you know before you install it which files it contains, which dependencies it has, and where to find  the documentation and configuration.
5. Check whether the RPM package contains any scripts. You may download it, but you may not install it yet; you want to know which scripts are in a package before actually installing it, right?
6. Install the package you have found in step 3.
7. Undo the installation.

**Lab 9.2**
1. Find out which application streams are available from the Perl module.
2. Install Perl from the latest application stream version, using the most minimal installation option.
3. Downgrade, such that the previous version of the Perl application will be used from now on.
4. Ensure that all dependent packages on your system are downgraded as well.




### LOCATIONS

* **/etc/pki** - where entitlement certificates are written to
* **/etc/pki/product** - certificates stored that indicate which Red Hat products are installed on the system
* **/etc/pki/consuer** - certificates are stored that identify Red Hat account to which the system is registered
* **/etc/pki/entitlement** - contains information about the subscriptions that are attached to the system