### Managing Processes

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which of the following is not generally considered a type of process? (Choose two.)
    1. A shell job
    2. A cron job
    3. A daemon
    4. A  thread
2. Which of the following can be used to move a job to the background?
    1. Press &
    2. Press Ctrl-Z and then type **bg**
    3. Press Ctrl-D and then type **bg**
    4. Press Ctrl-Z, followed by &
3. Which key combination enabled you to cancel a current interactive shell job?
    1. Ctrl-C
    2. Ctrl-D
    3. Ctrl-Z
    4. Ctrl-Break
4. Which of the following statements are true about threads? (Choose two.)
    1. Threads cannot be managed individually by an administrator.
    2. Multithreaded processes can make the working of processes more efficient.
    3. Thread can be used only on supported platforms.
    4. Using multiple processes is more efficient, in general, than using multiple threads.
5. Which of the following commands is most appropriate if you're looking for detailed information about the command and how it was started?
    1. **ps ef**
    2. **ps aux**
    3. **ps**
    4. **ps fax**
6. Of the following **nice** values, which will increase the priority of the selected process?
    1. 100
    2. 20
    3. -19
    4. -100
7. Which of the following shows correct syntax to change the priority for the current process with PID 1234?
    1. **nice -n 5 1234**
    2. **nice 5 1234**
    3. **renice 5 -p 1234**
    4. **nice 5 -p 1234**
8. Which of the following commands cannot be used to send signals to processes?
    1. **kill**
    2. **mkill**
    3. **pkill**
    4. **killall**
9. Which of the following commands would you use from **top** to change the priority of a process?
    1. **r**
    2. **n**
    3. **c**
    4. **k**
10. Which of the following commands will set the current performance profile to powersave?
    1. **tuneadm profile set powersave**
    2. **tuned-adm profile powersave**
    3. **tuneadm profile --set powersave**
    4. **tuned-adm profile --set powersave**

#### Foundation Topics

#### Introduction to Process Management

Three process types:
1. _Shell jobs_ are commands started from command line. Also known as _interactive processes_.
2. _Daemons_ are processes that provide services and normally started at boot. They are typically run with root privileges.
3. _Kernel threads_ are part of the Linux kernel. Administrators cannot manage them, but important for performance monitoring.

The Linux shell does not offer tools to manage individual threads.

#### Managing Shell Jobs

As a Linux administrator, you need to know how to start shells jobs in the foreground or background.

##### Running Jobs in the Foreground and Background

By default, any executed command is started as a foreground job.

Sometimes, it might prove useful to start command in the background. 

Two approaches to running a process in background:
1. If you know that a job will take a long time to complete, you can start it with an **&** behind it. This immediately starts the job in the background to make room for other tasks to start from the command line. Use **fg** to move most recent background job to foreground.
2. A job might have been started that takes (much) longer than predicted. If that happens, you can use Ctrl-Z to temporarily stop the job. This does not remove it from memory. Once paused, you can continue it as a background ob using the **bg** command.

Ctrl-C stops the current job and removes it from memory but nothing is closed properly.

Ctrl-D send the EOF character to the current job. The job stops waiting for input and next terminates.

##### Managing Shell Jobs

Use **jobs** command to get overview of current jobs.

##### Managing Parent-Child Relations

When a process is started from a shell, it becomes a child process of that shell.

All processes started fro ma shell are terminated when shell is stopped.

Processes started in background will not be killed when parent shell from which they are started is killed. To terminate these processes, use **kill** command.

If a parent process is killed while the child process is still active, the child process becomes a child of **systemd** instead.

#### Using Common Command-Line Tools for Process Management

##### Understanding Processes and Threads

As a Linux administrator, you cannot manage individual threads, you can only manage processes.

Two different types of background processes:
1. kernel threads
2. daemon processes

When managing processes, it is easy to recognize kernel processes beccause they have a name between square brackets.

##### Using ps to Get Process Information

For many command, options must start with a hyphen. For some, the hyphen is optional. The **ps** command is one those commands, for historic reasons.

The PID is an important piece of information to get using **ps**. 

##### Adjusting Process Priority with nice

By default, all regular processes are equal and started with same priority, which is the priority number 20.

Use **nice** or **renice** commands to change default priority that was assigned to the process when it started.

On current Linux kernels, the risk of increasing the priority of one process such that it deprives other processes (including kernel processes) is unlikely for two reasons:
1. Modern Linux kernels differentiate between essential threads that are started as real-time processes and normal user processes.
2. Modern computers have multiple CPU cores so that a single-threaded high priority process will never be able to get beyond the boundaries of its own CPU.

Using **renice**, regular users can only decrease the priority of a running process.

Only privileged users may increase priority.

##### Sending Signals  to Processes will kill, killall, and pkill

In RHEL 8, if you kill a parent process, all of its child processes become children of the systemd process.

* SIGTERM (15) is used to ask a process to stop.
* SIGKILL (9) is used to force a process to stop.
* SIGHUP (1) is used to hang up a process, which causes a process to reread its configuration files.

Generally a bad idea to use **kill -9** process because you risk losing data and system may become unstable.

Using **killall** was common when Linux environments were multiprocessing instead of multithreading.

#### Using top to Manage Processes

To renice a running process from **top**, type **r**. You will be prompted for the PID and the new **nice** value. Enter a positive value to decrease process priority, enter a negative value to increase process priority.

State | Meaning
--------------- | ---------
Running (R) | The process is currently active and using CPU time or in the queue of runnable processes waiting to get services.
Sleeping (S) | The process is waiting for an event to complete.
Uninterruptable sleep (D) | The process is in a sleep state that cannot be stopped. This usually happens while a process is waiting for I/O.
Stopped (T) | The process has been stopped, which typically has happened to an interactive shell process using the Ctrl-Z key sequence.
Zombie (Z) | The process has been stopped but could not be removed by its parent, which has put it in an unmanageable state.


You can view load average with **top** utility or **uptime** command. The load average is typically displayed for last 1, 5, and 15 minutes.

As a rule of thumb, the load average over a span of time should not be higher than the number of CPU cores in system (which you may find with **lscput**).

#### Using tuned to Optimize Performance

Profile | Use
--------------- | ---------
**balanced** | The best compromise between power usage and performance
**desktop** | Based on the balanced profile but tuned for better response to interactive applications
**latency-performance** | Tuned for maximum throughput 
**network-latency** | Based on latency-performance, but with additional options to reduce network latency
**network-throughput** | Based on throughput-performance, optimizes older CPUs for streaming content 
**powersave** | Tunes for maximum power saving
**throughput-performance** | Tunes for maximum throughput
**virtual-guest** | Optimizes Linux for running as a virtual machine
**virtual-host** | Optimizes Linux for use as a KVM host


#### Summary

In this chapter, you learned how to look up specific processes and how to change their priority using **nice** and **kill**. You also learned how to use **tuned** to seelct the performance profile that best matches your server's workload.

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Key Terms** job, process, background, foreground **nice**, **kill**, signal, PID, thread, **tuned**, profile, zombie

#### Review Questions

1. Which command gives an overview of all current shell jobs?
2. How do you stop the current shell job to continue running it in the background?
3. Which keystroke combination can you use to cancel the current shell job?
4. A user is asking you to cancel on the jobs he has started. You cannot access the shell that user currently is working from. What can you do to cancel his job anyway?
5. Which command would you use to show parent-child relationships between processes?
6. Which command enables you to change the priority PID 1234 to a higher priority?
7. On your system, 20 **dd** processes are currently running. What is the easiest way to stop all of them?
8. Which command enables you to stop the command with the name **mycommand**?
9. Which command do you use from **top** to kill a process?
10. What is  required to select a performance profile that best matches your system needs?

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

1. Launch the command **dd if=/dev/zero of=/dev/null** three times as a background job.
2. Increase the priority of one of these commands using the **nice** value **-5**. Change the priority of the same process again, but this time use the value **-15**. Observe the difference.
3. Kill all the **dd** processes you just started.
4. Ensure that **tuned** is installed and active and set the throughput-performance profile.

### COMMANDS

* **\<command> &** - start command in background 
* **fg** - move last job that was started in background to foreground
* **jobs \<job id>** - move background job with \<job id> to foreground
* **bg** - move foreground job to background
* _Ctrl-C_ - stop current job and remove from memory
* _Ctrl-Z_ - pause job, job stays in memory
* _Ctrl-D_ - stop job so that it properly closes
* **ps** - displays processes started by current user
* **ps aux** - displays short summary of active processes
* **ps -ef** - displays name of process and command that started it
* **ps fax** - display hierarchichal relationships between parent and child processes 
* **ps aux | grep dd** - show process details about **dd**
* **pgrep \<process name>** - show process details
* **nice** - start process with adjusted priority
* **renice** - change priority for a currently active process
* **renice -n 10 -p \<PID>** - set priority of process with \<PID> to 10 (which computes to 20 + 10 = 30)
* **kill \<PID>** - kill a process by sending SIGTERM signal
* **kill -9 \<PID>** - kill a process by sending SIGKILL signal
* **kill -l** - list available signals used with **kill**
* **pkill \<process name>** - kill a process with name \<process name>
* **killall \<PID>** - kill multiple processes with same name
* **uptime** - displays current load average statistics
* **lscpu** - displays number of cores in system
* **tuned** - utility that monitors system activity and provides some profiles that may tune a system 
* **tuned-adm** - talks to **tuned** daemon, and must be enabled before use
* **systemctl enable --now tuned** - enables the **tuned** profile
* **tuned-adm list** - overview of profile available
* **tuned-adm active** - displays current **tuned** profile
* **tuned-adm profile \<profile name>** - select profile for **tuned**
* **tuned-adm  recommend** - recommends a **tuned** profile
