### Managing Processes

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which command shows all service unit files on your system that are currently loaded?
    1. **systemctl --type=service**
    2. **systemctl --type=service --all**
    3. **systemctl --list-services**
    4. **systemctl --show-units | grep services**
2. Which statement about Systemd wants is _not_ true?
    1. You can create wants by using the **systemctl enable** command.
    2. The target to which a specific want applies is agnostic of the associated wants.
    3. Wants are always administered in the /usr/lib/systemd/system directory.
    4. Each service knows to which target its wants should be added.
3. What is the best solution to avoid conflicts between incompatible units?
    1. Nothing; the unit files have defined for themselves which units they are not compatible with.
    2. Disable the service using **systemctl disable**.
    3. Unmask the service using **systemctl unmask**.
    4. Mask the service using **systemctl mask**.
4. Which of the following is not a valid status for Systemd services?
    1. Running(active)
    2. Running(exited)
    3. Running(waiting)
    4. Running(dead)
5. Which of the following statements is _not_ true about socket units?
    1. A socket unit requries a service unit with the same name.
    2. Socket units can listen on ports and activate services only when activity occurs on a port.
    3. Socket units cannot contain the name of the associated binary that should be started.
    4. Socket units may react upon path activity.
6. Which of the following is not a valid Systemd unit type?
    1. service
    2. udev
    3. mount
    4. socket
7. You want to find out which other Systemd units have dependencies to a specific unit. Which command would you use?
    1. **systemd list-dependencies --reverse**
    2. **systemctl list-dependencies --reverse**
    3. **systemctl status my.unit --show-deps**
    4. **systemd status my.unit --show-dep -r**
8. How do you change the default editor that Systemd is using to **vim**?
    1. **export EDITOR=vim**
    2. **export SYSTEMD_EDITOR=vim**
    3. **export EDITOR=/bin/vim**
    4. **export SYSTEMD_EDITOR=/bin/vim**
9. Which of the following keywords should you use to define a Systemd dependency if you want to ensure that the boot procedure doesn't fail if the dependency fails?
    1. Required
    2. Requisite
    3. Before
    4. Wants
10. Which of the following is _not_ a valid command while working with units in **systemctl**?
    1. **systemctl unit start**
    2. **systemctl status -l unit**
    3. **systemctl mask unit**
    4. **systemctl disable unit**

#### Foundation Topics

#### Understanding Systemd

The Systemd System and Service Manager is used to start stuff. The stuff is referred to as _units_.

Units can be a service, socket, mount, target, or something else.

Typically, services are processes that provide specific functionality and allow connections from external clients such as SSH, Apache, etc.

##### Understanding Systemd Unit Locations

Unit files can occur in 3 locations (in order of precedence):
1. /run/systemd/system
2. /etc/systemd/system
3. /usr/lib/systemd/system

##### Understanding Systemd Service Units

Probably the most import unit type is the service unit. It is used to start processes.

Any Systemd _service_ unit file consists of the following three sections:
1. **[Unit]** Describes a unit and defines dependencies. Also contains **After** and optional **Before** statement, which define dependencies between different units.
2. **[Service]** Describes how to start and stop the service and request status installation. Note the **Type** option which is used to specify how the process should start. The **forking** type is commonly used by **daemon** processes. 
3. **[Install]** Indicates in which target this unit has to be started. 

##### Understanding Systemd Mount Units

A mount unit specifies how a file system can be mounted on a specific directory.

Some configuration options in a mount unit file:
1. **[Unit]** The **Conflicts** statement is used to list units that cannot be used together with this unit.
2. **[Mount]** Defines exactly where the mount has to be performed.

##### Understanding Systemd Socket Units

A socket may be defined as a file, but also as a port on which Systemd will be listening for incoming connections. The service will not run continuously, but instead will start only if a connection is coming in on the socket that is specified.

Every socket needs a corresponding service file.

The **ListenStream** option defines a TCP port that Systemd should be listening to for incoming connections. 

Sockets can also be created for UDP ports, in which case you should use **ListenDatagram** instead of **ListenStream**.

##### Understanding Systemd Target Units

A simple definition of a target unit is "a group of units"

Some targets are used to define the state a server should be started in.

Other targets are just a group of services that make it easy to manage not only individual units but all the units that are required to get specific functionality.

The command **systemctl enable** ensures that a unit is automatically started while boot and the [Install] section of that unit is considered to determine to which target the unit should be added.

When adding a unit to a target, a symbolic links is created in the target directory in /etc/systemd/system. In Systemd terminology, this symbolic links is known as a _want_ because it defines what the target wants to start when it is processed.

#### Managing Units Through Systemd

As an administrator, managing Systemd units starts with starting and stopping units.


Status | Description
--------------- | ---------
**Loaded** | The unit file has been processed and the unit is active.
**Active(running)** | The unit is running with one or more active processes.
**Active(exited)** | The unit has successfully completed a one-time run.
**Active(waiting)** | The unit is running and waiting for an event.
**Inactive(dead)** | The unit is not running.
**Enabled** | The unit will be started at boot time.
**Disabled** | The unit will not be started at boot time.
**Static** | The uit cannot be enabled but may be started by another unit automatically.

Command | Description
--------------- | ---------
**systemctl --type=service** | Shows only service units.
**systemctl list-units --type=service** | Shows all active service units (same result as the previous command).
**systemctl list-units --type=service --all** | Shows inactive service units as well as active service units.
**systemctl --failed --type=service** | Shows all services that have failed.
**systemctl status -l your.service** | Shows detailed status information about services.

##### Managing Dependencies

Two ways to manage Systemd dependencies:
1. Unit types such as socket and path are directly related to a service unit. Accessing either of these unit types will automatically trigger the service type.
2. Dependencies can be defined within the unit using keywords **Requires**, **Requisite**, **After**, and **Before**.

Different keywords can be used in [Unit] section of a unit:
1. **Requires** If this unit loads, units listed here will load also.
2. **Requisite** If unit listed here is not already loaded, unit will fail.
3. **Wants** This units wants to load the units that are listed here but it will not fail if any of the listed units fail.
4. **Before** This unit will start before the units specified here.
5. **After** This unit will start after the units specified here.

##### Managing Unit Options

When using **systemctl edit** to edit unit files, a subdirectory is created in /etc/systemd/system for the service that is edited. Within this subdirectory, a file named override.conf is created. All settings applied in this file overwrite any existing settings in the service file in /usr/lib/systemd/system.

By default, Systemd uses the **nano** editor. To change, edit the /root/.profile file to include the following line: **export SYSTEMD_EDITOR="/bin/vim"**. Log in again.

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Key Terms** unit, want, target, Systemd, dependencies

#### Review Questions

1. What is a unit?
2. Which command should you use to show all service units that are currently loaded?
3. How do you create a want for a service?
4. How do you change the default editor for **systemctl**?
5. Which directory contains custom Systemd unit files?
6. What should you include to ensure that a unit file will automatically load another unit file?
7. Which command will show available configuration options for the httpd.service unit?
8. Which command shows all dependencies for a specific unit?
9. What does it mean if **systemctl status** shows that a unit is dead?
10. How do you create a Systemd override file?

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

1. Install the vsftpd and httpd services.
2. Set the default **systemctl** editor to **vim**.
3. Edit the httpd.service unit file such that starting httpd will always auto-start vsftpd. Edit the httpd service such that after failure it is automatically started again in 10 seconds.

### COMMANDS

* **systemctl list-dependencies \<unit>** - display any existing dependencies of \<unit>
* **systemctl list-dependencies \<unit> --reverse** - display any units dependent on \<unit>
* **systemctl** - used to start and stop units
* **systemctl --type=service** - shows only service units
* **systemctl list-units --type=service** - shows all active service units (same result as the previous command)
* **systemctl list-units --type=service --all** - shows inactive service units as well as active service units
* **systemctl --failed --type=service** - shows all services that have failed
* **systemctl status -l your.service** - shows detailed status information about services
* **systemctl show \<unit>** - displays options available for \<unit>
* **systemctl edit \<unit>** - recommended way to edit custom unit files located in /etc/systemd/system.


### LOCATIONS

* **/usr/lib/systed/system** - contains default unit files that have been installed from RPM packages
* **/etc/systemd/system** - contains custom unit files, may also contain files that have been written by an administrator or generated by **systemctl edit**
* **/run/systemd/system** - contains unit files automatically generated