### Scheduling Tasks

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which of the following commands enables you to check the current status of the crond service?
    1.**service crond status**
    2. **systemctl status crond**
    3. **/usr/sbin/crond --status**
    4. **chkconfig crond --show**
2. Which of the following would run a cron task Sunday at 11 AM?
    1. \* 11 7 \* \*
    2. 0 11 \* 7 \*
    3. 0 11 \* \* 7
    4. 11 0 \* 7 \* 
3. Which of the following launches a job every five minutes from Monday through Friday?
    1. \*/5 \* \* \* 1-5
    2. \*/5 \* 1-5 \* \*
    3. 0/5 \* \* \* 1-5
    4. 0/5 \* 1-5 \* \*
4. How do you create a cron job for a specific user?
    1. Log in as that user and type **crontab -e** to open the cron editor.
    2. Open the crontab file in the user home directory and add what you want to add.
    3. As root, type **crontab -e username**.
    4. As root, type **crontab -u username -3**.
5. Which directory is mainly used by cron files that are installed automatically through RPM?
    1. /etc/crond.d
    2. /etc/cron.d
    3. /var/cron
    4. /var/spool/cron
6. Which of the following is not a recommended way to specify jobs that should be executed with cron?
    1. Modify /etc/crontab.
    2. Put the jobs in separate scripts in /etc/cron.d.
    3. Use **crontab -e** to create user-specific cron jobs.
    4. Put scripts in /etc/cron.{hourly|daily|weekly|monthly} for automatic execution.
7. Which service takes care of executing cron jobs in /etc/cron.hourly, cron.daily, cron.weekly, and cron.monthly?
    1. cron
    2. crontab
    3. atd
    4. anacron
8. Which of the statements about cron security is true?
    1. By default, all users are allowed to schedule tasks through cron because the /etc/cron.allow file has the keyword **all** in it.
    2. If the cron.deny file exists a cron.allow file must be created also and list users who are allowed to schedule tasks through cron.
    3. For every user, a matching entry must exist in either the cron.allow file or the cron.deny file.
    4. If the cron.allow file exists, a user must be listed in it to be able to schedule jobs through cron.
9. After entering commands in the at shell, which command enables you to close the at shell?
    1. Ctrl-V
    2. Ctrl-D
    3. **exit**
    4. **:wq**
10. Which command enables you to see current at jobs scheduled for execution?
    1. **atrm**
    2. **atls**
    3. **atq**
    4. **at**

#### Foundation Topics

#### Configuring Cron to Automate Recurring Tasks

The cron service is used as a generic service to run processes automatically at specific times.

Tasks can also be scheduled using a Systemd timer. However, Systemd timers are not included in the RHCSA exam objectives and not covered in this chapter.

The cron service consists of two major components:
1. The **cron** daemon, **crond**, which looks every minute to see whether there is work to do.
2. The **cron** configuration, which consists of multiple files working together to provide the right information to the right service at the right time.

##### Managing the crond Service

Logrotate is a **cron** service the cleans up log files and runs on a regular basis

The **crond** daemon wakes up every minute and checks its configuration to see whether anything needs to be started.

To monitor the current status of the cron service, you **systemctl status crond -l**.

##### Understanding Cron Timing

Examples:
* **\* 11 \* \* \*** every minute between 11:00 and 11:59
* **0 11 \* \* 1-5** every day at 11 AM on weekdays only
* **0 7-18 \* \* 1-5** every hour at the top of the hour between 7 AM and 6 PM on weekdays
* **0 \*/2 2 12 5** every 2 hours on the hour on December 2 and every Friday in December

Check **man 5 crontab** for all possible constructions.

##### Managing Cron Configuration Files

When creating a new job, give a safe margin of 3 minutes for the job to execute.

Use **crontab -e** to create new jobs.

The following directories contain scripts (not files that meet the crontab syntax requirements) that are put there from RPM package files. Files in these directories do not include time information.

##### Understanding the Purpose of anacron

**cron** uses the anacron service, which ensures the execution of hourly, daily, weekly and monthly **cron** jobs, nevermind the exact time.

It is not easy to get an overview of the cron jobs scheduled for execution. There is no single command that would show all currently scheduled cron jobs. The **crontab -l** command does list cron jobs, but only for current user.

##### Managing Cron Security

If **/etc/cron.allow** file exists, a user must be listed in it to be allowed to use Cron.

If **/etc/cron.deny** file exists, a user must not be listed in it to be allowed to set up Cron jobs.

Both files should not exist on the same system at the same time.

#### Configuring at to Schedule Future Tasks

The **atd** service is used to schedule jobs that need to be executed only once.

The **batch** command works like **at** but with **batch** you can specify that a job is only started when system performance parameters allow.

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Key Terms** cron, anacron, at 

#### Review Questions

1. Where do you configure a cron job that needs to be executed once every 2 weeks?
2. How do you specify the execution time in a cron job that needs to be executed twice every month, on the 1st and 15th of the month at 2 PM?
3. How do you specify a cron execution time for a job that needs to run every 2 minutes every day?
4. How do you specify a job that needs to be executed on September 19 and every Thursday in September?
5. Which three valid day indicators can you use to specify that a cron job needs to be executed on Sunday?
6. Which command enables you to schedule a cron job for user lisa?
7. How do you specify that user boris is never allowed to schedule jobs through cron?
8. You need to make sure that a job is executed every day, even if the server at execution time is temporarily unavailable. How do you do this?
9. Which service must be running to schedule at jobs?
10. Which command enables you to find out whether any current at jobs are scheduled for execution?

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

1. Create a con job that performs an update of all software on your computer every evening at 11 PM.
2. Schedule your machine to be rebooted at 3 AM tomorrow morning.

### COMMANDS

* **systemctl status crond -l** - check status of **crond** service
* **crontab -e** - create user-specific **cron** files
* **at \<time>** - run a job through **atd** service, shell will open
* **atq** - list **at** jobs
* **atrm** - remove current **at** jobs
* **batch**
* **atd -l 3.0** - specify no batch job will run when system load is higher than 3.0
* **logger message from at**


### LOCATIONS

* **/etc/crontab** - main configuration file for **cron** but not modified directly
* **/etc/crond.d** - location of **cron** file that may be modified
* **/etc/cron.hourly, cron.daily, cron.weekly cron.monthly** - location of **cron** files that may be modified
* **/etc/anacrontab** - file used by **anacron** service
* **/etc/cron.allow** & **/etc/cron.deny** - where you might turn of the **cron** tool for a user