### Scheduling Tasks

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which of the following statements about journald is _not_ true?
    1. journald logs kernel messages.
    2. jounrald write to the journal, which by default does not persist between boots.
    3. jounrald is a replacement of rsyslogd.
    4. To read files from the journal, the **journalctl** command is used.
2. Which log would you read to find messages related to authentication errors?
    1. /var/log/messages
    2. /var/log/lastlog
    3. /var/log/audit/audit.log
    4. /var/log/secure
3. Which log would you read to find information that relates to SELinux events?
    1. /var/log/messages
    2. /var/log/lastlog
    3. /var/log/audit/audit.log
    4. /var/log/secure
4. What is the name of the rsyslogd configuration file?
    1. /etc/rsyslog.conf
    2. /etc/sysconfig/rsyslogd.conf
    3. /etc/sysconfig/rsyslog.conf
    4. /etc/rsyslog.d/rsyslogd.conf
5. You need to change the startup behavior of the rsyslogd service. Which of the following describes the recommended approach to do so?
    1. Include he startup parameter in the main rsyslog configuration file.
    2. Create a snap-in file in the directory /etc/rsyslog.d and specify the required parameters in there.
    3. Change the Systemd unit file in /usr/lib/systemd/system to include the required startup parameter.
    4. use the SYSLOGD_OPTIONS line in the file /etc/sysconfig/rsyslog and include the startup parameter here.
6. In the rsyslog.conf file, which of the following destinations refers to a specific rsyslogd module?
    1. -/var/log/maillog
    2. /var/log/messages
    3. :omusrmsg:*
    4. *
7. Which facility is the best solution if you want to configure the Apache web server to log messages through rsyslog?
    1. daemon
    2. apache
    3. syslog
    4. local0-7
8. You want to maximize the file size of a log file to 10 MB. Where do you configure this?
    1. Create a file in /etc/logrotate.d and specify the maximal size in that file.
    2. Put the maximal size in the logrotate cron job.
    3. Configure the destination with the maximal size option.
    4. This cannot be done.
9. Which directory is used to store the journald journal?
    1. /var/log/journal
    2. /var/run/journal
    3. /run/log
    4. /run/log/journal
10. What do you need to do to make the journald persistent?
    1. Create a directory /var/log/journal, set appropriate permissions and reboot your machine.
    2. Open /etc/sysconfig/journal and set the PERSISTENT option to **yes**.
    3. Open the /etc/systemd/journalald.conf file and set the PERSISTENT option to **yes**.
    4. Create the /var/log/journal file and set appropriate permissions.

#### Foundation Topics

#### Understanding System Logging

Three approaches for services writing log information:
1. **Direct write** Some services write logging information directly to the log files - even some important services such as the Apache web server and the Samba file server.
2. **rsyslogd** rsyslogd is the enhancement of syslogd, a service that takes care of managing centralized log files. Syslogd has been around for a long time.
3. **journald** With the introduction of Systemd, the journald log service systemd-journald has been introduced also. This service is tightly integrated with Systemd, which allows administrators to read detailed information from the journal while monitoring service status using the **systemctl status** command.

##### Understanding the Role of rsyslogd and journald

**journald** is implemented by the **systemd-journald daemon**.

**journald** collects messages from kernel, boot procedure and services and writes these messages to a binary format event journal.

The **journalctl** command access the event journal written to by **journald**.

The event journal is not persistent between reboots.

Messages are also forwarded to **rsyslogd** service, which writes messages to different files in **/var/log** directory.

**journal** is tightly integrated with Systemd.

Another logging service is the **auditd** service. SELinux uses **auditd** service but **auditd** service is not within the scope of RHCSA exam.

Three monitoring approaches for admins:
1. Monitor the files in **/var/log** that are written by **rsyslogd**.
2. Use the **journalctl** command to get more detailed information.
3. Use **systemctl status \<unit>** command to get short overview of the last significant events that have been logged by Systemd units through **journald**.

##### Reading Log Files

Apart from the aforementioned files, Linux also houses log files in **/var/log**. 

Most of the files in **/var/log** are managed by **rsyslogd** but some of the files are created directly by specific services.

**Log File** | **Explanation**
------- | -------
**/var/log/messages** | The most commonly used log file, it is the generic log file where most messages are written to.
**/var/log/dmesg** | Contains kernel log messages.
**/var/log/secure** | Contains authentication-related messages. Look here to see which authentication errors have occurred on a server.
**/var/log/boot.log** | Look here for messages that are related to system startup.
**/var/log/audit/audit.log** | Contains audit messages. SELinux writes to this file.
**/var/log/maillog** | Look here for mail-related messages.
**/var/log/samba** | Provides log files for Samba service. Notice that Samba by default is not managed through rsyslog, but writes directly to the /var/log directory.
**/var/log/sssd** | Contains messages that have been written by the sssd service, which plays an important role in the authentication process.
**/var/log/cups** | Contains log messages that were generated by the print service CUPS.
**/var/log/httpd** | Directory that contains log files that are written by the Apache web server. Notice that Apache writes messages do these files directly and not through rsyslog.

##### Understanding Log File Contents

Contents:
* **Date and time** Timestamp in military time.
* **Host** Host the message originated from, rsyslogd can be configured to handle remote logging as well.
* **Service or process name** Name of the service or process that generated the message.
* **Message content** Content of message.

##### Live Log File Monitoring

* **tail -f \<logfile>** - show logging in real time

##### Using logger

The **logger** command enables user to write messages to rsyslog from the command line or a script.

The **logger** utility offers a convenient solution to write messages from scripts. 

#### Configuring rsyslogd

Configure the **rsyslogd** service through the _/etc/rsyslog.conf_ file.

##### Understanding rsyslogd Configuration Files

The configuration for **rsyslogd** is not defined in just one configuration file.

The **/etc/rsyslog.conf** file is the central location where rsyslogd is configured.

If specific options need to be passed to the **rsyslogd** service on startup, you can do this by using the **/etc/sysconfig/rsyslog** file. This file contains one default line, **SYSLOGD_OPTIONS=""**.

##### Understanding rsyslog.conf Sections

Sections in rsyslog.conf:
1. **#### MODULES ####** **rsyslogd** is modular
2. **#### GLOBAL DIRECTIVES ####** Specify global parameters, such as location where auxiliary files are written
3. **#### RULES ####** Most important part of _rsyslog.conf_ file. Contains rules that specify what information should be logged to which destination.

##### Understanding Facilities, Priorities, and Log Destinations

**rsyslogd** uses facilities, priorities, and destinations.

* A _facility_ specifies a category of information that is logged. The list of _facilities_ is fixed and cannot be extended.
* A _priority_ is used to define the severity of the message that needs to be logged.
* A _destination_ defines where the message should be written.

When using a file destination, if the filename starts with a hyphen (as in -/var/log/maillog), the log messages will not be immediately written to the file but will be buffered for efficiency.

**Facility** | **Used by**
------- | -------
**auth/authpriv** | Messages related to authentication.
**cron** | Messages generated by the crond service.
**daemon** | Generic facility that can be used for nonspecified daemons.
**kern** | Kernel messages.
**lpr** | Messages generated through the legacy lpd print system.
**mail** | Email-related messages.
**mark** | Special facility that can be used to write a marker periodically.
**news** | Messages generated by the NNTP news system.
**security** | Same as auth/authpriv. Should not be used anymore.
**syslog** | Messages generated by the syslog system.
**user** | Messages generated in user space.
**uucp** | Messages generated by the legacy UUCP system.
**local0-7** | Messages generated by services that are configured by any of the local0 through local7 facilities.

If there are services that do not have their own rsyslogd facility that need to write log messages to a specific log file anyway, these services can be configured to use any of the local0  through local7 facilities.

**Priority** | **Description**
------- | -------
**debug** | Debug messages that will give as much information as possible about service operation.
**info** | Informational messages about normal service operation.
**notice** | Informational messages about items that might become an issue later.
**warning / warn** | Something is suboptimal but there is no real error yet.
**err / error** | A noncritical error has occurred.
**crit** | A critical error has occurred.
**alert** | USed when the availability of the service is about to be discontinued.
**emerg / panic** | Message generated when the availability of the service is discontinued.

If you need to configure logging in a detailed way, where messages with different priorities are sent to different files, you can specify the priority with an equals sign (=) in front of it, as in the following line, which will write all con messages with only the debug priority to a specific file with the name /var/log/cron.debug. The - in front of the line specifies to buffer writes so that information is logged in a more efficient way.

```cron.=debug -/var/log/cron.debug```

#### Rotating Log Files

When a log file is rotated, the old log file is typically copied to a file that has the rotation date in it.

As a default, four old log files are kept on the system.

#### Working with journald

The systemd-journald service stores log messages in the journal, a binary file that is temporarily stored in the file /run/log/journal.

This file can be examined using **journalctl** command.

##### Using journalctl to Find Events

##### Preserving the Systemd Journal

By default, the journal is stored in the file /run/log/journal. The entire /run directory is used for current process status information only, which means that the journal is cleared when the system reboots.

To make the journal persistent between system restarts, make sure that a directory /var/log/journal exists.

Storing the journal permanently requires setting the Storage=auto parameter in /etc/systemd/journal.conf. This parameter can have the following values:
1. **Storage=auto** - journal will be written on disk if directory /var/log/journal exists
2. **Storage=volatile** - journal will be stored only in the /run/log/journal directory
3. **Storage=persistent** - journal will be stored on disk in the directory /var/log/journal, which will be created automatically if it doesn't exist
4. **Storage=none** - no data will be stored but forwarding to other targets such as the kernel log buffer or syslog will still work

Journal is limited to a maximum size of 10% of file system.

If less than 15% of file system is free, file will stop growing.

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Key Terms** journald, **journalctl**, rsyslogd, facility, priority, destination, log rotation

#### Review Questions

1. Which file is used to configure rsyslogd?
2. Which configuration file contains messages related to authentication?
3. If you do not configure anything, how long will it take for log files to be rotated away?
4. Which command enables you to log a message from the command line to the user facility, using the notice priority?
5. Which line would you add to write all messages with a priority of info to the file /var/log/messages.info?
6. Which configuration file enables you to allow the journal to grow beyond its default size restrictions?
7. Which command enables you to see new messages in the journal scrolling by in real time?
8. Which command enables you to see all journald messages that have been written for PID 1 between 9:00 AM and 3:00 PM?
9. Which command enables you to see journald messages since the last reboot on a system where a persistent journal has been configured?
10. Which procedure enables you to make the journald journal persistent?

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

1. Configure the journal to be persistent across system reboots.
2. Make a configuration file that writes all messages with an info priority to the file /var/log/messages.info.
3. Configure logrotate to keep ten old versions of log files.

### COMMANDS

* **systemctl status \<service> -l** - display logging information about sshd service
* **tail -10 /var/log/messages** - shows partial content from **/var/log/messages**
* **tail -f \<logfile>** - shows in real time which lines are added to the log file
* **logger** - enables users to write messages to rsyslog from command line or script
* **logger -p kern.err hello** - writes _hello_ to the kernel facility using the error priority
* **tail -20 /var/log/secure** - shows last 20 lines in **/var/log/secure**
* **man logrotate**
* **journalctl -f** - shows last lines of the messages where new log lines are automatically added
* **journalctl --no-pager** - shows contents of journal without using a pager
* **journalctl -p err** - command shows errors only
* **journalctl --since \<YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss>**
* **journalctl --until \<YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss>**
* **journalctl --since yesterday**
* **journalctl --since today**
* **journalctl --since tomorrow**
* **journalctl --o verbose** - show verbose output