### Managing Storage

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which of the following is _not_ an advantage of using a GUID partition table over using an MBR partition table?
    1. Access time to a directory is quicker.
    2. A total amount of 8 ZiB can be addressed by a partition.
    3. With GUID partitions, a backup copy of the partition table is created automatically.
    4. There can only be up to 128 partitions in total.
2. You want to create a partition with a size of 1024^5 bytes. What size should it be?
    1. 1 PB
    2. 1 PiB
    3. 1 EB
    4. 1 EiB
3. Which partition type is commonly used to create a Linux partition?
    1. 81
    2. 82
    3. 83
    4. 8e
4. What is the default disk device name you would expect to see in KVM virtual machines?
    1. /dev/sda
    2. /dev/hda
    3. /dev/sda
    4. /dev/xsda
5. Which of the following statements is _not_ true?
    1. Do not ever use **gdisk** on an MBR disk.
    2. **fdisk** offers support to manage GPT partitions as well.
    3. Depending on your needs, you can create MBR and GPT partitions on the same disk.
    4. If you server boots from EFI, you must use GPT partitions.
6. Which of the following file systems is used as the default in RHEL8?
    1. Ext4
    2. XFS
    3. btrfs
    4. Ext3
7. Which command enables you to find current UIDs set to the file systems on your server?
    1. **mount**
    2. **df -h**
    3. **lsblk**
    4. **blkid**
8. What would you put in the device column of /etc/fstab to mount a file system based on its unique ID 42f419c4-633f-4ed7b161-519a4add3da?
    1. 42f419c4-633f-4ed7-b161-519a4dadd3da
    2. /dev/42f419c4-633f-4ed7-b161-519a4dadd3da
    3. ID=42f419c4-633f-4ed7-b161-519a4dadd3da
    4. UUID=42f419c4-633f-4ed7-b161-519a4dadd3da
9. Which of the following /etc/fstab lines would perform a file system check on the file system but only after the root file system has been checked successfully?
    1. /dev/sda1 /data xfs defaults 1 1
    2. /dev/sda1 /data xfs defaults 1 2
    3. /dev/sda1 /data xfs defaults 1 1
    4. /dev/sda1 /data xfs defaults 0 2
10. Which mount option would you use in /etc/fstab to specify that the file system can be mounted only after the network is available?
    1. **network**
    2. **_netdev**
    3. **_network**
    4. **netdev**

#### Foundating Topics

#### Understanding MBR and GPT Partitions

To use a hard drive, it needs to have partitions.

Some operating systems install everything on one partition.

Linux typically has several partitions on one hard drive.

Reasons to use more than one partition on a hard drive:
1. It's easier to distinguish between different types of data.
2. Specific mount options can be used to enhance security or performance.
3. It's easier to create a backup strategy where only portions of the OS are backed up.
4. If one partition accidentally fills up completely,  the other partitions still are usable and your system might not crash immediately.

Instead of using multiple different partitions, you may also use different LVM logical volumes (Chapter 15).

On RHEL 8, two different partitioning schemes are available.

##### Understanding the MBR Partitioning Scheme

Early on in personal computers, a system was needed to define hard disk layout - the Master Boot Record (MBR) partitioning scheme.

The MBR contains all that is needed to start a computer, including a boot loader and a partition table.

The MBR was defined as the first 512 bytes on a computer hard drive, and in the MBR, an operating system boot loader (such as GRUB 2) was present as well as a partition table.

The partition table was usually small, 64 bytes, so that the MBR could create no more than 4 partitions. The maximum size that could by used by a partition was limited to 2 TiB.

In order to use more than 4 partitions, the following workaround was often put in place: one of the partitions was made an _extended partition_, as opposed to the others, which were _primary partitions_ and within the extended partition, up to 15 _logical_ partitions could be created and addressed by the Linux kernel.

##### Understanding the Need for GPT Partitioning

Current computer hard drives have become too big to be addressed by MBR partitions. Enter the GUID Partition Table (GPT).

On computer that use the new Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI) as a replacement for BIOS, GPT partitions are the only way to address disks.

Also, older PCs still using BIOS can be configured for GUID partitions, which is necessary if a disk larger than 2 TiB needs to be addressed.

Using GUID offers the following benefits:
* The maximum partitions size is 8 zebibytes (ZiB), which is 1024 x 1024 x 1024 X 1024 gibibytes.
* In GPT, up to a maximum number of 128 partitions can be created.
* The 2 TiB limit no longer exists.
* Becuase space that is available to store partitions is much bigger than 64 bytes, which was used in MBR, there is not longer a need to distinguish between primary, extended, and logical partitions.
* GPT uses a 128-bit global unique ID (GUID) to identify partitions.
* A backup copy of the GUID partition table is created by default at the end of the disk, which eliminates the single point of failure that exists on MBR partitions tables.
 
##### Understanding Storage Measurement Units

On current Linux distributions, the binary numbers (MiB, not MB, for instance) have become the standard, although some utilities still measure in decimal format.

**Symbol** | **Name** | **Value** | **Symbol** | **Name** | **Value**
------ | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | -------
KB | Kilobyte  | 1000^1 | KiB | Kibibyte | 1024^1
MB | Megabyte  | 1000^2 | MiB | Mebibyte | 1024^2
GB | Gigabyte  | 1000^3 | GiB | Gibibyte | 1024^3
TB | Terabyte  | 1000^4 | TiB | Tebibyte | 1024^4
PB | Petabyte  | 1000^5 | PiB | Pebibyte | 1024^5
EB | Exabyte   | 1000^6 | EiB | Exbibyte | 1024^6
ZB | Zettabyte | 1000^7 | ZiB | Zebibyte | 1024^7
YB | Yottabyte | 1000^8 | YiB | Yobibyte | 1024^8

#### Managing Partitions and File Systems

the **fdisk** utility is used to create MBR partitions.

The **gdisk** utility is used to create GPT partitions.

Apart from **fdisk** and **gdisk**, other utilties exist, including **parted**.

**Device Name** | **Description**
------- | -------
/dev/sda | A hard disk that uses the SCSI driver. Used for SCSI and SATA disk devices. Common on physical servers but also in VMware virtual machines.
/dev/nvme0n1 | The first hard disk on an NVM Express (NVMe) interface. NVMe is a server-grade method to address advanced SSD devices. 
/dev/hda | The (legacy) IDE disk device type. You will seldom see this device type on modern computers.
/dev/sda | A disk in a KVM virtual machine that uses the virtio disk driver. This is the common disk device type for KVM virtual machines.
/dev/xvda | A disk in a Xen virtual machine that uses the Xen virtual disk driver.

Notice that almost all disk device names end with _a_. that is because it is the first disk found on your server. Other disks might also be listed, such as /dev/sdb and down to /dev/sdz. After that, it repeats, i.e., /dev/sdaa, /dev/sdab, etc.

##### Creating MBR Partitions with fdisk

See **Exercise 14-1 Creating MBR Partitions with fdisk**

##### Using Extended and Logical Partitions on MBR

If three partitions have been created already, there is room for one more primary partition, after which the partition table is completely filled up. To go beyond four, you must create an extended partition. Following that, you create logical partitions within the extended partition.

If you need more than four separate storage allocation units, you might be better off using LVM instead of logical partitions.

An extended partition is ONLY used for the purpose of creating logical partitions. You cannot create file systems directly on an extended partition!

The **fdisk** utility writes changes to disk only when you enter **w**. Press **q** to quit without saving.

The **partprobe** command updates the kernel partition table. If you receive an error using this command, reboot and check to see if the changes have taken effect. If not, you might not want to continue modifying and managing partitions.

##### Creating GPT Partitions with gdisk

If a disk is configured with a GUID Partition Table (GPT), or if it is a new disk that does not contain anything yet and has a size that goes beyond 2 TiB, use  the **gdisk** utility to create GUID partitions.

**WARNING!!** Do not ever use **gdisk** on a disk that has been formatted with **fdisk** and already contains **fdisk** partitions. The **gdisk** utility will detect an MBR is present and will convert this to a GPT. Your PC will probably not start afterwards.

##### Creating GPT Partitions with parted

The **parted** utility can be used to create partitions, but it lacks support of advanced features.

To use **parted**, you need to know that is has an interactive shell in which you can work with its different options.

##### Creating File Systems

For a partition to be useful, put a file system on top of it.

**File System** | **Description**
------- | -------
XFS | The default file system in RHEL 8.
Ext4 | The default file system in previous versions of RHEL; still available and supported in RHEL 8.
Ext3 | The previous version of Ext4. On RHEL 8, there is no need to use Ext3 anymore.
Ext2 | A very basic file system that was developed in the early 1990s. There is no need to use this file system on RHEL 8 anymore.
BtrFS | A relatively new file system that is not supported in RHEL 8.
NTFS | A Windows-compatible file system that is not supported on RHEL 8.
VFAT | A file system that offers compatibility with Windows and Mac and is the functional equivalent of the FAT32 file system. Useful on USB thumb drives that exchange data with other computers but not on a server's hard disks.

To format a partition with one of the supported file systems, use the command **mkfs -t**.

##### Changing File System Properties

File system properties are specific for the file system you are using, so you work with different properties and different tools for the different file systems.

##### _Managing Ext4 File System Properties_

The generic tool for managing Ext4 file system properties is **tune2fs**. This tool was developed for the Ext2 file system and is compatible with Ext3 and Ext4 file systems.

##### _Managing XFS File System Properties_

You can use **xfs_admin** to manage XFS properties.

##### Adding Swap Partitions

Using swap on Linux is a convenient way to improve Linux kernel memory usage. If a shortage of physical RAM occurs, non-recently used memory pages can be moved to swap, which mores RAM available for programs that need access to memory pages.

Sometimes allocating more swap space makes sense. If a shortage of memory occurs, this shortage can be alleviated by allocating more swap space in some situations.

##### Adding Swap Files

If you do not have free disk space to create a swap partition and you need to add swap space urgently, you can use a swap file as well. 

Use command **dd if=/dev/zero of=/swapfile bs=1M count=100**  to add 100 blocks with a size of 1 MiB from the /dev/zero device (which generates 0s) to the /swapfile file. The result is a 100-MiB file that can be configured as swap. To configure the file, use **mkswap /swapfile**. Then use **swapon /swapfile** to activate.

#### Mounting File Systems

Just creating a partition and putting a file system on it is not enough to start using it.

By mounting a partition (or really the file system on it), you make its contents accessible through a specific directory.

To mount a file system, the following information is necessary:
* **What to mount** This information is mandatory and specifies the name of the device that needs to be mounted.
* **Where to mount it** This is also mandatory information that specifies the directory on which the device should be mounted.
* **What file system to mount** Optionally, you can specify the file system type. In most cases, this is not necessary. The **mount** command will detect which file system is used on the device and make sure the correct driver is used.
* **Mount options** Many mount options can be used when mounting a device. Using options is optional and depends on the needs you have for the file system.

##### Manually Mounting File Systems

To manually mount a file system, the **mount** command is used.

To disconnect the mount, use **umount** with either the name of the device or the name of the mount point you want to disconnect.

##### Using Device Names, UUIDs, or Disk Labels

To mount a device , the name of the device can be used. If your server is used in an environment where a dynamic storage topology is used, this is not always the best approach.

On default RHEL 8 installations, UUIDs are used instead of device names.

Every file system by default has a UUID associated with it.

Use the **blkid** command to get an overview of the current file systems on your system and the UUID that is used by that file system.

Before the use of UUIDs was common, file systems were often configured to work with labels, which can be set with **e2label** or **xfs_admin -L**. This has become more uncommon in recent Linux versions.

The **blkid**  command will show a file system's label.

##### Automating File System Mounts Through /etc/fstab

The classic way to mount file systems is with the **/etc/fstab** file.

Every entry in the fstab file has 6 fields.

**Field** | **Description**
------- | -------
Device | The device that must be mounted. A device name, UUID, or label can be used.
Mount Point | The directory or kernel interface where the device needs to be mounted.
File System | The file system type.
Mount Options | Mount options.
Dump Support | Use 1 to enable support to back up using the **dump** utility. This may be necessary for some backup solutions.
Automatic Check | Specifies whether the file system should be checked automatically when booting. Use 0 to disable automated check, 1 if this is the root file system and has to be checked automatically, and 2 for all other file systems that need automatic checking while booting. Network file systems should have this options set to 0.

Kernel interfaces are easy to recognize in **/etc/fstab**. They do not start with a /.

The Mount Options field defines specific mount option that can be used.

**Option** | **Use**
------- | -------
**auto/ noauto** | The file system will [not] be mounted automatically.
**acl** | Adds support for file system access control lists.
**user_xattr** | Adds support for user-extended attributes.
**ro** | Mounts the file system in read-only mode.
**atime / noatime** | Disables or enables access time modifications.
**noexec / exec** | Denies or allows execution of program files from the file system.
**_netdev** | Use this to mount a network file system. This tells fstab to wait until the network is available before mounting the file system.

The fifth column of **/etc/fstab** specifies support for the dump utility. Switch on with 1, off with 0.

The last column indicates whether the file system integrity needs to be checked. Switch 0 if no, 1 if this is root file system, and 2 if nonroot file system needs to be checked.

**WARNING** If a file system through /etc/fstab is flagged for automatic file system check and something prevents the file system from being checked correctly, your system stops booting and prompts "enter root password to enter maintenance mode".

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Define Key Terms** BIOS, MBR, partition, primary partition, extended partition, logical partition, GPT, mount, umount, UUID, label, Ext2, Ext3, Ext4, XFS, BtrFS, VFAT, fstab

#### Review Questions

1. Which tool do you use to create GUID partitions?
2. Which tool do you use to create MBR partitions?
3. What is the default file system on RHEL 8?
4. What is the name of the file that is used to automatically mount partitions while booting?
5. Which mount option do you use if you want a file system not to be mounted automatically while booting?
6. Which command enables you to format a partition that has type 82 with the appropriate file system?
7. You have just added a couple of partitions for automatic mounting while booting. How can you safely test if this is going to work without actually rebooting?
8. Which file system is created if you use the **mkfs** command without any file system specification?
9. How do you format an Ext4 partition?
10. How do you find UUIDs for all devices on your computer?

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

Start from a clean installation. Before starting this lab, restore the original setup using the following two steps:

1. Type **dd if=/dev/diskfile of=/dev/sda**. Use **of=/dev/vda** if your disk device is /dev/vda instead of /dev/sda.)
2. Copy the backup of the /etc/fstab file using **cp /root/fstab /etc**.

This restores the original configuration. After successfully completing the lab, repeat this procedure. This allows you to work on clean disks when creating LVM logical volumes in the next chapter.

1. Add two partitions to your server. If possible, put them on the primary disk that is in use on your server. If that is not possible, use a second (virtual or USB) disk to add these partitions. Create both partitions with a size of 100 MiB. One of these partitions must be configured as swap space; the other paritition must be formated with an Ext4 file system.
2. Configure your server to automatically mount these partitions. Mount the Ext4 partition on /mounts/data and mount the swap partition as swap space.
3. Reboot your server and verify that all is mounted correctly. In case of problems, read Chapter 18 "Essential Troubleshooting Skills" for tips on how to troubleshoot.

### COMMANDS

* **mkfs -t** - format a partition with a supported file system, i.e., **mkfs -t xfs /dev/sda5**
* **tune2fs -l /dev/sda3** - displays different file system properties
* **tune2fs -o** - set the default file system mount options
* **tune2fs -o acl,user_xattr** - switch on access control lists and user-extended attributes
* **tune2fs -o ^acl,user_xattr** - switch off access control lists and user-extended attributes
* **tune2fs -O** - switch on a file system feature
* **tune2fs -O ^** - switch off a file system feature
* **tune2fs -L** - set a label on the file system, which allows you to use a file system label to mount a file system based on its name instead of the device name
* **e2label** - equivalent to **tune2fs -L**
* **xfs_admin** - allows management of some XFS properties
* **xfs_admin -L \<label>** - set the file system label to \<label>
* **dd if=/dev/zero of=/swapfile bs=1M count=100** - adds 100 blocks with a size of 1 MiB from the /dev/zero device to the /swapfile file
* **mkswap /swapfile** - mark the files as a swap file
* **swapon /swapfile** - activate the swap file
* **mount /dev/sda5 /mnt** - mounts the file system that is on /dev/sda5 on the directory /mnt
* **umount /dev/sda5** - disconnects /dev/sda5 from /mnt
* **umount /mnt** - disconnects /dev/sda5 from /mnt
* **mount UUID="42f419c4-633f-4ed7-b161-519a4dadd3da" /mnt** - mounts file system with that UIDD to /mnt
* **mount LABEL=\<labelname> /mnt** - mounts file system with \<labelname> to /mnt