### Managing Advanced Storage

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which of the following is not a standard component in an LVM setup?
    1. Logical volume
    2. File system
    3. Volume group
    4. Physical volume
2. Which of the following is not an LVM feature?
    1. Volume resizing
    2. Hot replacement of failing disk
    3. Copy on write
    4. Snapshots
3. Which partition type do you need on a GPT partition to mark it with the LVM partition type?
    1. 83
    2. 8e
    3. 8300
    4. 8e00
4. Which of the following commands shows correctly how to create a logical volume that uses 50% of available disk space in the volume group?
    1. **vgadd -n lvdata -l +50%FREE vgdata**
    2. **lvcreate lvdata -l 50%FREE vgdata**
    3. **lvcreate -n lvdata -l 50%FREE vgdata**
    4. **lvadd -n lvdata -l 50% FREE /dev/vgdata**
5. Which command shows an overview of available physical volumes? (Choose two.)
    1. **pvshow**
    2. **pvdisplay**
    3. **pvs**
    4. **pvlist**
6. Which statement about resizing LVM logical volumes is _not_ true?
    1. The Ext4 file system can be increased and decreased in size.
    2. Use **lvextend** with the **-r** option to automatically resize the file system.
    3. The XFS file system cannot be resized.
    4. To increase the size of a logical volume, you need allocatable space in the volume group.
7. How much storage is used in a Stratis file system for metadata storage?
    1. 527 MiB
    2. 1 BiB
    3. 4 MiB
    4. 4 GiB
8. Which of the following lines correctly shows how a Stratis file system should be mounted through /etc/fstab?
    1. **UUID=abcd /stratis xfs defaults 0 0**
    2. **/dev/stratis/stratis1 /stratis xfs defaults,x-systemd.requires=stratis.service 0 0**
    3. **UUID=abcd /stratis xfs defaults,x-systemd.requires=stratis.service 0 0**
    4. **/dev/stratis/stratis1 /stratis xfs defaults 0 0**
9. Which of the following environments could benefirt from using VDO? (Choose all that apply.)
    1. Virtualization
    2. Databases
    3. Containers
    4. Cloud storage
10. Which option should you use while formatting a VDO device with the XFS file system to ensure that empty blocks are not immediately discarded?
    1. **-k**
    2. **-K**
    3. **-d**
    4. **-D**

#### Foundation Topics

#### Understanding LVM

It is not possible to dynamically grow a partition that is running out of disk space, but it is possible with LVM (Logical Volume Manager).

##### LVM Architecture

In LVM architecture, several layers can be distinguished.

On the lowest layer, the storage devices are used, such as complete disks, partitions, logical units (LUNs) on a storage-area network (SAN), etc.

In this chapter, you learn how to use partitions as physical volumes, which is the recommended practice.

By using partitions instead of complete disk devices, it is easy for other tools to recognize that some storage has already been configured on the block device.

If you are running out of disk space on a logical volume, you take available disk space from the volume group. And if there is no available disk space in the volume group, you just add it by adding a phyiscal volume.

On top of the volume group, there are logical volumes. Logical volumes do no act on disks directly, but get their disk space from available disk space in the volume group.

##### LVM Features

LVM offers a flexible solution for managing storage. Volumes are no longer bound to the restrictions of phyiscal hard drives. If additional storage space is needed, the volume group can easily be extended by adding a new physical volume, so that disk space can be added to the logical volumes.

It is also possible to reduce the size of a logical volume, but only if the file system that was created on that volume supports the feature of reducing the size of the file system.

LVM supports snapshots. _Snapshots_ keep the current state of a logical volume and can be used to revert to a previous situation.

A third important advantage of using LVM logical volumes is the option to replace failing hardware easily. If a hard disk is failing, data can be moved within the volumne group (using the **pvmove** command), the failing disk can be removed from the volume group, and a new hard disk can be added dynamically.

#### Creating LVM Logical Volumes

Creating LVM logical volumes involves creating the three layers in the LVM architecture. 

First, convert physical devices, such as disks or partitions, into physical volumes (PVs).

Then create the volume group (VG) and assign PVs to it.

Third, create the logical volume (LV) itself.

The only commands to memorize for the exam are **pv**, **vg**, and **lv**.

##### Creating the Physical Volumes

You need to first create a partition marked as the LVM partition type (see **Chapter 14**, with the only difference being that before writing changes to disk, you need to change the partition  type).

With **fdisk** or **gdisk**, use option **t** to set the type

With **parted** use the **set _n_ lvm on** within the **parted** interface.

As an alternative to the **pvs** command, you can also use the **pvdisplay** command.

See **Exercise 15-1** & **Example 15-2**.

##### Creating the Volume Groups

The command **vgcreate** creates volume groups.

You already learned how create a physical volume with the **pvcreate** command, then add the volume group using the **vgcreate** command.

But a one-step alternative procedure is simply like this: **vgcreate vgdata /dev/sdc**. This creates a volume group **vgdata** that contains the **/dev/sdc** device. The **vgcreate** utility automtically flags it as a physical volume.

The physical extent size defines the size of the building blocks used to create logical volumes.

A logical volume always has a size that is a multiple of the physical extent size.

If not specified with **vgcreate -s** option, the default size is 4.00 MiB.

##### Creating the Logical Volumes and File Systems

Now that the volume group has been created, you can start creating logical volumes from it.

The volume size can be specified as an absolute value (**-L** option) or using relative sizes (**-l 50%FREE**).

For instance, use **lvcreate -n lvvol1 -L100M vgdata** to create a logical volume with the name **lvvol1** and add that to the **vgdata** volume group. Then use **mkfs** utility to create a file system on top of it.

##### Understanding LVM Device Naming

LVM volume device names can be addressed multiple ways.

The simplest method is **/dev/vgname/lvname**, for a volume **lvname** within group **vgname**.

The device mapper (abbreviated dm) is a generic interface that the Linux kernel uses to address storage devices. To make these devices easier to access, the device mapper creates a symbolic link in the **/dev/mapper** directory that points to these meaningless device names. These symbolic links follow the pattern **/dev/mapper/vgname-lvname**.

See **Exercise 15-2**.

**Command** | **Explanation**
------- | -------
**pvcreate** | Creates physical volumes
**pvs** | Shows aa summary of available physical volumes
**pvdisplay** | Shows a list of physical volumes and their properties
**pvremove** | Removes the physical volume signature from a block device
**vgcreate** | Creates volume groups
**vgs** | Shows a summary of available volume groups
**vgdisplay** | Shows a detailed list of volume groups and  their properties
**vgremove** | Removes a volume group
**lvcreate** | Creates logical volumes
**lvdisplay** | Shows a detailed list of available logical volumes and their properties
**lvremove** | Removes a logical volume

#### Resizing LVM Logical Volumes

One of the major benefits of using LVM is that LVM volumes are easy to resize.

If XFS file system is used, a volume can be increased but not decreased.

Other file systems, such as Ext4, support decreasing of size. This can be done in offline mode only, which means that you need to unmount it before you can resize it.

##### Resizing Volume Groups

The command **vgextend** is used to add storage to a volume group.

The command **vgreduce** is used to take physical volumes out of a volume group.

Make sure that a physical volume or device is available to be added to the volume group.

##### Resizing Logical Volumes and File Systems

The command **lvextend** command is used to add storage to logical volumes.

Most file system resizing can be done online if the file system is getting bigger, without the need to unmount the file system.

The command **lvresize** command is also used to add storage to logical volumes.

A logical extent is the logical building block used when creating logical volumes, and it mounts to a physical extent, the size of which can be specified when creating a volume group.

The size of an XFS file system cannot be decreased; it can only be increased. If you need a file system that can be shrunk in size, use Ext4, not XFS.

See **COMMANDS** for **lvresize** examples.

#### Configuring Stratis

In RHEL 8, Red Hat has added two advanced storage types: Stratis and VDO.

Stratis is a so-called _volume-managing file system_ and it introduces advanced storage features that were not available in previous versions of RHEL:
* **Thin provisioning** This feature enables a Stratis file to present itself to users as much bigger than it really is. This is useful in many environments, such as virtual desktops where each user may see 20 GiB of available storage in total although a much lower amount is actually provisioned.
* **Snapshots** A Stratis snapshot allows users to take a "picture" of the current state of a file system. This snapshot makes it easy to revert to the previous state of a file system, rolling back any changes that have been made.
* **Cache tier** Cache tier is a Ceph stroage feature that ensures that data can be stored physically close to the Ceph client, which makes data access faster.
* **Programmatic API** The programmatic API ensures that storage can be easily configured and modified through API access. Particularly interesting in cloud environments.
* **Monitoring and repair** Whereas old file systems need tools like **fsck** to verify the integrity of the file system, Stratis has built-in features to monitor the health of the file system.

##### Understanding Stratis Architecture

The lowest layer in the Stratis architecture is the pool. 

From a functional perspective, the Stratis pool is comparable to an LVM volume group.

A _pool_ represents all the available storage and consists of one or more storage devices, which in a Stratis environment are referred to as _blockdev_.

Stratis only works with XFS.

Stratis file systems are always thin provisioned. The thin volume automatically grows as more data is added to the file system.

##### Creating Stratis Storage

Start by creating a pool.

Once the pool is added, create file systems from it.

Make sure the block devices have a minimal size of 1 GiB.

1. Install the Stratis software using **yum** by installing the **stratis-cli** and **stratisd** packages.
2. Start and enable the user-space daemon, using **systemctl enable --now stratisd**.
3. Once the daemon is running, use the **stratis pool create** command to create the pool you want to work with.
4. Once you have created the pool, add a file system using **stratis fs create \<poolname> \<fsname>**.
5. To verify, use the **stratis fs list** command.
6. After creating the file system, you can mount it. To mount a Stratis file system through **/etc/fstab**, you _must_ use the UUID. Also, when mounting, include option **s-systemd.requires=stratisd.service** to ensure that the Systemd waits to activate this devices until the **stratisd** service is loaded.

##### Managing Stratis

Use command **stratis pool add-data** to dynamically extend the pool.

* **stratis blockdev** Shows information about all block devices that are used for Stratis.
* **stratis pool** Gives information about Stratis pools.
* **stratis filesystem** Enables you to monitor individual file systems.

A Stratis snapshot contains the state of the file system at the moment the snapshot was created.

The snapshot can be modified.

The snapshot can live longer than the file system it was created from.

#### Configuring VDO

VDO was a solution developed to offer data deduplication features.

##### Understanding VDO

Virtual Data Optimizer (VDO) is another advanced storage solution offered in RHEL 8. VDO was developed to reduce disk space usage on block devices by applying deduplication features.

VDO creates volumes, implementing deduplication on top of any type of existing block device.

On top of the VDO device, you would either create a file system or use it as a physical volume in an LVM setup.

The main purpose of VDO is data deduplication.

3 common deduplication technologies:
1. Zero-block elimination fitlers out data blocks that contain only zeros.
2. Deduplication reduces redundant data blocks.
3. Compression occurs when the kvdo kernel module compresses data blocks.

VDO is typically used with containers, virtual machines, and cloud block storage.

##### Setting Up VDO

For VDO, the underlying block devices must have a minimal size of 4 GiB. Also, the **vdo** and **kmod-vdo** packages must be installed.

Create the device with **vdo create** and use the **--vdiLogicalSize=** option to specify the logical size ofthe volume.

After creating the device, put an XFS file system on top it using **mkfs.xfs -K /dev/mapper/vdol**. The **-K** option with **mkfs.xfs** prevents unused blocks in the file system from being discarded immediately, which executes the command faster.

Once the file system has been created, add to **/etc/fstab** to automatically mount it. Make sure to include the mount options **x-systemd.requires=vdo.service,discard** which triggers the **vdo systemd** service to be reloaded. 

Verify it all with **vdostats --human-readable**.

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Define Key Terms** physical volume (PV), volume group (VG), logical volume (LV), device mapper, physical extent, logical extent, snapshot, Stratis, VDO, deduplication, thin allocation

#### Review Questions

1. Which partition type is used on a GUID partition that needs to be used in LVM?
2. Which command enables you to create a volume group with the name vgroup that contains the physical device /dev/sdb3 and uses a physical extent size of 4 MiB?
3. Which command shows a short summary of the physical volumes on your system as well as the volume group to which these belong?
4. What do you need to do to add an entire hard disk /dev/sdd to the volume group vgroup?
5. Which command enables you to create a logical volume lvvol1 with a size of 6 MiB?
6. Which command enables you to add 100 MB to the logical volume lvvol1, assuming that the disk space is available in the volume group?
7. When working with Stratis, whta line would you add to /etc/fstab to mount the Stratis volume?
8. Which command do you use to create a Stratis pool that is based on the block device /dev/sdd?
9. Which command do you use to create a VDO device with a virtual size of 1 TiB?
10. Which option do you need with mkfs.xfs to successfully create an XFS file system on top of a VDO thin-provisioned volume?

#### End-of-Chapter Labs

To complete the following end-of-chapter labs, you need a dedicated disk device. Use either a USB thumb drive or add a new virtual disk to your virtual environment before starting.

**Lab 15.1**
1. Create a 500-MB logical volume named **lvgroup**. Format it with the XFS file system and mount it persistently on /groups. Reboot your sever to verify that the mount works.
2. After rebooting, add another 250 MB to the **lvgroup** volume that you just created. Verify that the file system resizes as well while resizing the volume.
3. Verify that the volume extension was successful.

**Lab 15.2**
1. Create a Stratis pool with a size of 5 GiB. In this pool, create two Stratis file systems and ensure that they are automatically mounted.
2. Add an additional block device to the Stratis pool and verify that the size of the pool was successfully extended.

**Lab 15.3**
1. Create a VDO volume with a virtual size of 1 TiB.
2. Ensure the VDO volume is automatically mounted by using the example Systemd unit file.
3. Reboot your server to verify that everything still works.


### COMMANDS

* **pvmove**
* **pv**
* **vg**
* **lv**
* **gdisk t \<type>** - set the partition type
* **fdisk t \<type>** - set the partition type
* **parted** with **set _n_ lvm on** - set the partition type
* **pvcreate** - make partition as physical volume
* **pvs** - verify that physical volume has been created successfully
* **lsblk** - displays a very compact overview of current storage configuration
* **vgcreate \<volume group> \<physical device>** - create a new volume group and add physical volume to it
* **vgcreate -s** - specifies physical extent size
* **vgs** - short summary of volume group
* **vgdisplay** - more detailed summary of volume group
* **lvcreate -n lvvol1 -L 100M vgdata** - create a logical volume with name **lvvol1** and addss that to the **vgdata** volume group
* **vgextend** - used to add storage t oa volume group
* **vgreduce** - used to take physical volumes out of a volume group
* **lvextend** - extends logical volumes
* **lvextend -r** - extends logical volumes and their file systems (recommended use)
* **lvresize** - also changes size of logical volume
* **lvresize -r -l 75%VG /dev/vgdata/lvdata** - resizes the logical volume so that it will take 75% of the total disk space in the volume group
* **lvresize -r -l +75%VG /dev/vgdata/lvdata** - attempts to add 75% of the total size of the volume group to the logical volume
* **lvresize -r -l +75%FREE /dev/vgdata/lvdata** - adds 75% of all free disk space to the logical volume
* **lvresize -r -l 75%FREE /dev/vgdata/lvdata** - resizes the logical volume to a total size that equals 75% of the amount of free disk space
* **stratis pool create** - create a stratis pool
* **stratis pool create \<poolname> \<block device>** - create a pool named \<poolname> on \<block device>
* **stratis fs create \<poolname> \<fsname>** - once pool is created, add a file system
* **stratis fs list** - verify stratis pool and file system created
* **s-systemd.requires=stratisd.service** - ensures that Systemd waits to activate this device until stratisd service is loaded
* **stratis blockdev** - shows information about all block devices used for Stratis
* **stratis pool** gives information about Stratis pools
* **stratis pool list** - verify successful creation of pool
* **stratis filesystem**- enables monitor of individual file systems
* **blkid** - find Stratis volume UUID
* **vdo create** - create vdo device
* **vdo create --name=\<vdo name> --device=/dev/\<device name> --vdoLogicalSize=\<size>** - create a vdo **\<vdo name>** on device **\<device name>** with name **\<vdo name>** and size **\<size>**
* **vdostats --human-readable** - verify vdo is working