### Basic Kernel Management

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. What causes a tainted kernel?
    1. A kernel driver that is not available as an open source driver
    2. A driver that was developed for a different operating system but has been ported to Linux
    3. A driver that has failed
    4. An unsupported driver
2. What is the name of the command that shows kernel events since booting?
    1. **logger**
    2. **dmesg**
    3. **klogd**
    4. **journald**
3. Which command enables you to find the actual version of the kernel that is used?
    1. **uname -r**
    2. **uname -v**
    3. **procinfo -k**
    4. **procinfo -l**
4. Which command shows the current version of RHEL you are using?
    1. **uname -r**
    2. **cat /proc/rhel-version**
    3. **cat /etc/redhat-release**
    4. **uname -k**
5. What is the name of the process that helps the kernel to initialize hardware devices properly?
    1. systemd-udevd
    2. hwinit
    3. udev
    4. udevd
6. Where does you system find the default rules that are used for initializing new hardware devices?
    1. /etc/udev/rules.d
    2. /usr/lib/udev/rules.d
    3. /usr/lib/udev.d/rules
    4. /etc/udev.d/rules
7. Which command should you use to unload a kernel module, including all of its dependencies?
    1. **rmmod**
    2. **insmod -r**
    3. **modprobe -r**
    4. **modprobe**
8. Which command enables you to see whether the appropriate kernel modules have been loaded for hardware in your server?
    1. **lsmod**
    2. **modprobe -l**
    3. **lspci -k**
    4. **lspci**
9. Where do you specify a kernel module parameter to make it persistent?
    1. /etc/modules.conf
    2. /etc/modprobe.conf
    3. /etc/modprobe.d/somefilename
    4. /usr/lib/modprobe.d/somefilename
10. Which statements about updating the kernel are _not_ true?
    1. the **yum update kernel** command will install a new kernel and not update it.
    2. The **yum install kernel** command will install a new kernel and keep the old kernel.
    3. The kernel package should be set as a **yum**-protected package to ensure that after an update the old kernel is still available.
    4. After you have installed a new kernel version, you must run the **grub2-mkconfig** command to modify the GRUB 2 boot menu so that it shows the old kernel and the newly installed kernel.

#### Understanding the Role of the Linux Kernel

The Linux kernel is the heart of the operating system.

##### Understanding the Use of Kernel Threads and Drivers

Kernel threads are easily recognized with commands like **ps aux**. These threads are listed between square brackets.

Another important task of the Linux kernel is hardware initialization. To make sure that this hardware can be used, the Linux kernel uses drivers. 

Because a driver performs privileged instructions within the kernel space, a badly functioning driver may crash the entire kernel.

A _tainted kernel_ is a kernel that contains closed source drivers.

##### Analyzing What the Kernel is Doing

Tool to analyze what the kernel is doing:
* the **dmesg** utility
* the /proc file system
* the **uname** utility

The **dmesg** utility shows the contents of the kernel ring buffer, an area of memory where the Linux kernel keeps its recent log messages.

The /proc file system is an interface to the Linux kernel, and it contains files with detailed status information about what is happening on your server.

The **uname** command gives different kinds of information about the operating system.

#### Working with Kernel Modules

Since Linux kernel 2.0, kernels are no longer compiled but are modular.

##### Understanding Hardware Initialization

The loading of drivers is an automated process:
1. During boot, the kernel probes available hardware.
2. Upon detection of a hardware component, the systemd-udevd process takes care of loading the appropriate driver and making the hardware device available.
3. To decide how the devices are initialized, **systemd-udevd** reads rules files in /usr/lib/udev/rules.d. These are system-provided rules files that should not be modified.
4. After processing the system-provided udev rules files, **systemd-udevd** goes to the /etc/udev/rules.d directory to read any custom rules if these are available.
5. As a result, required kernel modules are loaded automatically, and status about the kernel modules and associated hardware is written to the sysfs file system, which is mounted on the /sys directory. The Linux kernel uses this pseudo file system to track hardware-related settings.

The **systemd-udevd** process continuously monitors plugging and unplugging of new hardware devices.

##### Managing Kernel Modules

On rare occasions, you must load the appropriate kernel modules manually. 

An alternative method of loading kernel modules is through the /etc/modules-load.d directory. In this directory, you create files to load modules automatically that are not loaded by the systemd-udevd method already.

For default modules that should always be loaded, this directory has a counterpart in /usr/lib/modules-load.d.

**Command** | **Use**
------- | -------
**lsmod** | Lists currently loaded kernel modules
**modinfo** | Displays information about kernel modules
**modprobe** | Loads kernel modules, including all their dependencies
**modprobe -r** | Unloads kernel modules, considering kernel module dependencies

Commands **insmod** and **rmmod** should not be used because they do not account for dependencies.

##### Checking Driver Availability for Hardware Devices

The best way to check whether kernel modules for detected devices are available is with the **lspci** command.

##### Managing Kernel Module Parameters

You may easily automate the loading of kernel modules with specific parameters by creating a file in /etc/modprobe.d directory, where the module is loaded including the parameter that is specified.

#### Upgrading the Linux Kernel

The kernel files for the last four kernels installed reside in /boot directory.

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Define Key Terms** kernel, module, **dmesg**, udev, sysfs, proc, tainted kernel

#### Review Questions

1. Which command shows the current version of the kernel that is used on your computer?
2. Where do you find current version information about your RHEL 8 installation?
3. Which command shows a list of kernel modules that are currently loaded?
4. Which command enables you to discover kernel module parameters?
5. How do you unload a kernel module?
6. What can you do if you get an error message while trying to unload a kernel module?
7. How do you find which kernel module parameters are supported?
8. Where do you specify kernel module parameters that should be used persistently?
9. Assuming that the cdrom module has a parameter **debug**, which must be set to 1 to enable debug mode, which line would you include in the file that will automatically load that module?
10. How do you install a new version of the kernel?

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

**Labe 16.1**
1. Find out whether a new version of the kernel is available. If so, install it and reboot your computer so that it is used.
2. Use the appropriate command to show recent events that have been logged by the kernel.
3. Locate the kernel module that is used by your network card. Find out whether it has options. Try loading one of these kernel module options manually. If that succeeds, take the required measure to load this option persistently.

### COMMANDS

* **ps aux** - displays operating system tasks
* **journalctl -k** or **journalctl -k** - equivalent commands that show kernel-related messages with time relative to start of kernel
* **journalctl -k / --dmesg** - shows kernel-related messages with a regular time indicator
* **uname -a** - displays an overview of all relevant parameters 
* **uname -r** - displays kernel version
* **hostnamectl status** - displays useful information about system
* **systemd-udevd** - not a command but a process that loads and monitors drivers for the initialization of hardware
* **udevadm monitor** - lists all events that are processed while activating new hardware devices
* **lsmod** - lists currently loaded kernel modules
* **modinfo** - displays information about kernel modules
* **modprobe** - loads kernel modules, including all their dependencies
* **modprobe -r** - unloads kernel modules, considering kernel module dependencies
* **lspci** - shows all hardware devices detected on PCI bus
* **lspci -k** - lists all kernel modules that are used for the PCI device that were detected
* **yum upgrade kernel** - installs a new version of the kernel
* **yum install kernel** - also installs a new version of the kernel without discarding the old