### Essential Troubleshooting Skills

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which of the following comes first in the Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8 boot procedure?
    1. Systemd
    2. kernel
    3. GRUB 2
    4. Initramfs
2. You have just entered a kernel argument on the GRUB 2 boot prompt. Pressing which key(s) enables you to start with this boot argument?
    1. ZZ
    2. Ctrl-X
    3. Esc
    4. Enter
3. You initramfs seems faulty and cannot initialize the LVM volumes on your disk. Which configuration file should you check for options that are used?
    1. /etc/dracut.d/dracut.conf
    2. /etc/dracut.conf
    3. /etc/sysconfig/dracut
    4. /etc/mkinitrd.conf
4. You do not have the root password and want to reset it. Which kernel argument offers the recommended way to reset it?
    1. **init=/bin/bash**
    2. **init=/bin/sh**
    3. **systemd.unit=emergency.target**
    4. **rd.break**
5. You want to see exactly what is happening on system boot. Which two boot options should you remove from the GRUB 2 boot prompt? (Choose two.)
    1. **rhgb**
    2. **logo**
    3. **quiet**
    4. **silent**
6. You want to enter the most minimal troubleshooting mode where as few services as possible are loaded. Which boot argument should you use?
    1. **systemd.unit=break.target**
    2. **systemd.unit=emergency.target**
    3. **systemd.unit=rescue.target**
    4. **l**
7. Which of the following situations can be resolved only by using a rescue disk?
    1. The kernel stop loading.
    2. The initramfs stops loading.
    3. You never get to a GRUB 2 boot prompt.
    4. You are prompted to enter the root password for maintenance mode.
8. You have entered a troubleshooting mode, and disk access is read-only. What should you do?
    1. Restart the troubleshooting mode and pass the **rw** boot option to the kernel.
    2. Use the **rd.break** boot argument to manually start into the initramfs mode.
    3. Use **mount -o remount,rw /**.
    4. Use **mount /**.
9. You server shows a blinking cursor only while booting. No GRUB 2 menu is available. What is the first step in troubleshooting this issue?
    1. From a rescue disk, try the **Boot from local disk** option.
    2. Start a rescue environment and reinstall GRUB.
    3. Start a rescue environment and re-create the initramfs.
    4. Use the **rd.break** boot argument.
10. When recovering access to a virtual machine, you need to make the storage devices in the image file available. Which of the following commands would do that, assuming that the name of the image file is /home/user/lab1.img?
    1. **partx -ax /home/user/lab1.img**
    2. **kpartx -ax /home/user/lab1.img**
    3. **kpartx -av /home/user/lab1.img**
    4. **partx -av /home/user/lab1.img**

#### Foundation Topics

#### Understanding the RHEL 8 Boot Procedure

It is essential to have a good understanding of the boot procedure.
1. **Performing POST**  The machine is powered on. From the system firmware, which can be the modern Universal Extended Firmware Interface (UEFI) or the classical Basic Input Output System (BIOS), the Power-On Self-Test (POST) is executed, and the hardware that is required to start the system is initialized.
2. **Selecting the bootable device** Either from the UEFI boot firmware or from the BIOS, a bootable device is located.
3. **Loading the boot loader** From the bootable device, a boot loader is located. On RHEL, this is usually GRUB 2.
4. **Loading the kernel** The boot loader may present a boot menu to the user or can be configured to automatically start a default operating system. To load Linux, the kernel is loaded together with the initramfs, which contains kernel modules for all hardware required to boot as well as the initial scripts required to proceed.
5. **Starting /sbin/init** Once the kernel is loaded into memory, the first of all processes is loaded but still from the initramfs. This is the /sbin/init process which is linked to Systemd on RHEL. The udev daemon is loaded as well for further hardware initialization.
6. **Processing initrd.target** The Systemd process executes all units from the initrd.target, which prepares a minimal operating environment, where the root file system on disk is mounted on the /sysroot directory.
7. **Switching to the root file system** The system switches to the root file system that is on disk and at this point can load the Systemd process from disk as well.
8. **Running the default target** Systemd looks for the default target to execute and runs all of its units. A login screen is presented. The login prompt can be prompted before all Systemd unit files have been loaded successfully.

Troubleshooting has always been a part of the RHCSA exam.

**Boot Phase** | **Configuring It** | **Fixing It**
------- | ------- | -------
POST | Hardware configuration (F2, Esc, F10, or another key) | Replace hardware
Selecting the bootable device | BIOS/UEFI configuration or hardware boot menu | Replace hardware or use rescue system
Loading the boot loader | **grub2-install** and edits to /etc/defaults/grub | GRUB boot prompt and edits to /etc/defaults/grub, followed by **grub2-mkconfig**
Loading the kernel | Edits to the GRUB configuration and /etc/dracut.conf | GRUB boot prompt and edits to /etc/defaults/grub, followed by **grub2-mkconfig**
Starting /sbin/init | Compiled into initramfs | **init=kernel** boot argument, **rd.break** kernel boot argument
Processing initrd.target | Compiled into initramfs | Not typically required
Switch to the root file system | Edits to the /etc/fstab file | Edits to the /etc/fstab file
Running the default target | Using **systemctl set-default** to create the /etc/systemd/system/default.target symbolic link | Start the rescue.target as kernel boot argument

#### Passing kernel Boot Arguments

If your server does not boot normally, the GRUB boot prompt offers a convenient way to stop the boot procedure and pass specific options to the kernel while booting.

##### Accessing the Boot Prompt

From boot menu, press **e** to enter a mode where you may edit commands, or **c** to enter a full GRUB command prompt.

From GRUB interface, go down to section that begins _($root)vmlinuz_ followed by a lot of arguments. This line tells GRUB how to start a kernel.

Removing **rhgb** and **quiet** parts from this line allows boot messages to be displayed.

##### Starting a Troubleshooting Target

Options to enter into GRUB boot prompt:
* **rd.break** Stops the boot procedure while still in the initramfs stage. Useful if you do not have root password available.
* **init=/bin/sh or init=/bin/bash** Specifies that a shell should be started immediately after loading the kernel and initrd. Not always the best option.
* **systemd.unit=emergency.target** Enters a mode that loads a bare minimum number of Systemd units. Requires a root password.
* **systemd.unit=rescue.target** Starts some more Systemd units to bring you in a more complete operation mode. Requires a root password.

#### Using a Rescue Disk

It is preferable to be able to boot from hard disk.

If not, the default rescue image for RHEL is on the installation disk.

##### Restoring System Access Using a Rescue Disk

Using a rescue disk, after selecting the Troubleshooting option, you are presented with options:
* **Install RHEL 8 in Basic Graphics Mode** Reinstalls machine. Normally never used.
* **Rescue a RHEL System** Most flexible rescue system. First option.
* **Run a Memory Test** Run if you encounter memory errors.
* **Boot from Local Drive** If you cannot boot from GRUB, try this option first.

After starting a rescue system, typically need to enable full access to the on-disk installation. The rescue disk usually detects your installation and mounts it on the /mnt/sysimage directory. Use **chroot /mnt/sysimage** command.

##### Reinstalling GRUB Using a Rescue Disk

You might need to reinstall GRUB 2 boot loader if it breaks.

Reinstalling GRUB 2 consists of two steps:
1. Make sure that you have made the contents of the /mnt/sysimage directory available to your current working environment using **chroot**.
2. Use the **grub2-install** command, followed by the name of the device on which you want to install GRUB 2. So, on a virtual KVM machine, **grub2-install /dev/vda** and on a physical machine **grub2-install /dev/sda**.

##### Re-Creating the Initramfs Using a Rescue Disk

If initramfs image is damaged, a new initramfs may be created using **dracut**.

See **LOCATIONS**

According to RHCSA, you should not have to work with a rescue disk on exam.

#### Fixing Commons Issues

##### Reinstalling GRUM 2

Is your server still bootable? If so, reinstalling GRUB 2 is easy. Just type **grub2-install \<device name>**. 

Is your server not bootable? Start a rescue system and restore access to your server from rescue system. After mounting server's file systems on /mnt/sysimage and using **chroot /mnt/sysimage** to make mounted system image your root image, reinstall as previous described: **grub2-install \<device name>**.

##### Fixing the Initramfs

If you never see the root file system getting mounted on the root directory during the procedure, nor any Systemd units getting started, your initramfs may be damaged. Use **dracut --force** to recreate initramfs.

##### Recovering from File System Issues

If you see message "Give root password for maintenance", **fsck** may be trying to verify the integrity of file systems in /etc/fstab while booting. Enter the root password, then type **journalctl -xb** to see relevant messages. If the problem is file system oriented, type **mount -o remount,rw /** to make sure that the root file system is mounted read / write. Analyze the /etc/fstab file to fix it.

File system-related topics have a heavy weight on RHCSA objectives. Pay attention to this issue, and learn how to fix it.

##### Resetting the Root Password

Steps to reset root password:
1. On system boot, press **e** when the GRUB 2 boot menu is shown.
2. Enter **rd.break** as a boot argument to the line that loads the kernel and press Ctrl-X to boot with this option.
3. You'll now be dropped to the end of the boot stage where initramfs is loaded, just before a mount of the root file system on the directory /.
4. Type **mount -o remount,rw /sysroot** to get read / write access to the system image.
5. At this point, make the contents of the /sysimage directory your new root directory by typing **chroot/sysroot**. 
6. Now you can enter **passwd** and set new password for user root.
7. SELinux has not yet been activated, so the context type on /etc/shadow is off. You must ensure that the context type is set correctly by loading the SELinux. Use command **load_policy -i**.
8. Now you can manually set the correct context type to /etc/shadow. Type **chcon -t shadow_t /etc/shadow**.
9. Reboot. Log in with new root password.

#### Recovering Access to a Virtual Machine

The following procedure is advanced. Try not to fuck up the exam to the point where you are forced to do this.

Steps to recover access to virtual machine:
1. Open root shell on KVM host. Make sure that the virtual machine is stopped by using **virsh destroy \<vmname>**.
2. Find the disk image file. Normally stored in /var/lib/libvirt/images directory. Use **virsh dumpxml \<vmname> | grep "source file="** to find source file name.
3. Mount image file on host environment using the **kpartx -a** command.
4. The **kpartx** command creates devices that enable you to access the two partitions in the virtual machine. The first partition is the /boot partition and the second partition is normally used for LVM logical volumes. Mount the /boot partition easily by using **mount /dev/mapper/loop0p1 /mnt**. 
5. Use **pvscan** command to access logical volumes that exist within the virtual machine's second partition. **pvscan /dev/mapper/loop0p2**
6. You have activated the LVM setup within the virtual machine. Type the **lvs** command to see the logical volumes listed. You may activate them using **vgchange**. After doing this you can mount them also to directly access all files in the virtual machine file system.
7. After having fixed all these issues in virtual machine, unmount all file systems currently mounted. Remove the device files that have been created based on the contents of the virtual machine image file by using **kpartx -dv /home/\<file path and name>**.

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Define Key Terms** target, GRUB, initramfs, **dracut**

#### Review Questions

1. Which key do you need to press to enter the GRUB boot menu editor mode?
2. During startup, the boot procedure is not completed and the server asks for the root password instead. What is likely to be the reason for this?
3. You want to enter troubleshooting mode, but you do not know the root password. Which argument would you pass to the kernel to enter a mode that provides access to most of the machine's functionality?
4. You start your server and nothing happens. You just see a blinking cursor and  that's all. What is the first step to troubleshoot this issue?
5. You want to ind out which units are available in a specific troubleshooting environment. Which command would you use?
6. You want to start troubleshooting a lost root password. Which arguments would you pass to the GRUB 2 boot loader?
7. From the shell that you have started to troubleshoot a lost password for user root, you want to load the SELinux policy. Which command enables you to do that?
8. While troubleshooting the root password, what do you need to do to make sure the SELinux labels are set correctly?
9. You have applied changes to the GRUB 2 boot loader and want to save them. How do you do that?
10. You do know the root password on a machine where you want to enter the most minimal troubleshooting mode. Which GRUB 2 boot argument would you use? 

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

1. Restart your server and change the root password from the appropriate troubleshooting mode.
2. In /etc/fstab, change one of the device names so that on next reboot the file system on it cannot be mounted. Restart and fix the issue that you encounter.
3. Use a  rescue disk to bring your server up in full troubleshooting mode from the rescue disk.
4. Re-create the initramfs.

### COMMANDS

* **grub2-mkconfig -o /boot/grub2/grub.cfg** - apply modification to /etc/default/grub config file
* **systemctl list-units** - verifies only a limited number of unit files have been loaded
* **chroot /mnt/sysimage** - makes contents of this directory your actual working environment
* **grub2-install \<device name>** - command used to reinstall GRUB 2
* **dracut** - creates a new initramfs for the currently loaded kernel
* **dracut --force**
* **mount -o remount,rw /sysroot** - get read / write access to the system image
* **chroot /sysroot** - makes contents of /sysimage new root directory
* **load_policy -i** - load SELinux policy
* **chcon -t shadow_t /etc/shadow** - manually sets the correct context type to /etc/shadow

### LOCATIONS

* **/usr/lib/dracut/dracut.conf/d/*.conf** - contains system default configuration files
* **/etc/dracut.conf.d** - contains custom dracut configuration files
* **/etc/dracut.conf** - used as the master configuration file