### An Introduction to Bash Shell Scripting

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which line should every Bash shell script start with?
    1. **/bin/bash**
    2. **#!/bin/bash**
    3. **!#/bin/bash**
    4. **!/bin/bash**
2. What is the purpose of the **exit 0** command that can be used at the end of a script?
    1. It informs the parent shell that the script could be executed without any problems.
    2. It makes sure that the script can be stopped properly.
    3. It is required only if a **for** loop has been used to close the **for** loop structure.
    4. It is used to terminate a conditional structure in the script.
3. How do you stop a script to allow a user to provide input?
    1. **pause**
    2. **break**
    3. **read**
    4. **stop**
4. Which line stores the value of the first argument that was provided when starting a script in the variable NAME?
    1. **NAME=$1**
    2. **$1=NAME**
    3. **NAME=$@**
    4. **NAME=$1**
5. What is the best way to distinguish between different arguments that have been passed into a shell script?
    1. **$?**
    2. **$#**
    3. **$\***
    4. **$@**
6. What is used to close an **if** loop?
    1. **end**
    2. **exit**
    3. **stop**
    4. **fi**
7. What is missing in the following script at the position of the dots? 
    ```bash
    if [ -f $1]
    then
        echo "$1 is a file"
    ..... [ -d $1 ]
    then
        echo "$1 is a directory"
    else
        echo "I do not know what \$1 is" 
    ```
    1. **else**
    2. **if**
    3. **elif**
    4. **or**
8. What is missing in the following script at the position of the dots?
    ```bash
    for (( counter=100; counter > 1; counter--)); .......
        echo $counter
    done
    exit 0
    ```
    1. **in**
    2. **do**
    3. **run**
    4. **start**
9. Which command is used to send a message with the subject "error" to the user root if something didn't work out in a script?
    1. **mail error root**
    2. **mail -s error root**
    3. **mail -s error root .**
    4. **mail -s error root < .**
10. In a a **case** statement it is a good idea to include a line that applies to all other situations. which of the following would do that?
    1. **\*)**
    2. **\***
    3. **else**
    4. **or**

#### Foundation Topics

#### Understanding Shell Scripting Core Elements

The _shebang_ is the line **#!/bin/bash**. It makes clear that the script is a Bash shell script.

Other scripts can be specified, as well, such as **#!/usr/bin/perl**.

Be sure to include comment sections to scripts, which should start with **#**.

**exit 0** exits the script and **0** means that it exited successfully.

After writing a script, make sure that it can be executed by granting it execution privileges: **chmod +x hello**.

If you store a script in a directory that is not in the **$PATH**, then you must precede execution of script with **./**.

#### Using Variables and Input

##### Using Positional Parameters

In a script, the first argument is referred to as **$1**, the second is referred to as **$2**, and so on...

The body of a **for** loop always starts with **do** and is closed with **done**.

##### Working with Variables

There are two solutions to define a variable dynamically:
1. Use **read** in the script to ask the user who runs the script for input.
2. Use the command substitution to use the result of a command and assign that to a variable.

The **read** statement in a script takes input from users.

```sh
#!/bin/bash
if [ -z $1 ]; then
    echo Enter a name
    read NAME
else
    NAME=$1
fi
echo You have entered the text $NAME
exit 0
```

The **if... then... else... fi** statement is used to check whether **$1** exists. 

This can be done using the **test** command, which can be written with either **test** or **[...]**.

```if [-z $1 ]``` executes to see if test **-z $1** is true (does **$1** exist?).

Notice how variables are defined. Directly after then name of the variable there is an **=** sign, which is followed by **$1**. Never use spaces when defining variables.

#### Using Conditional Loops

In Bash, the following conditional loops are often used:
* **if...  then... else...** Used to execute codes if a specific condition is true.
* **for** Used to execute commands for a range of values.
* **while** Used to execute code as long as a specific condition is true.
* **until** Used to execute code until a specific condition is true.
* **case** Used to evaluate specific values, where beforehand a limited number of values is expected.

##### Working with if ... then ... else

The **if... then... else...** statement is often used together with **test** command.

Check the **test** man page.

Notice the use of the following flags: **-z**, **-d**, and **-f**.

```sh
#!/bin/bash
# the goal is to find out if element is a file or a directory
if [ -f $1 ]
then
    echo "$1 is a file"
elif [ -d $1 ]
then
    echo "$1 is a directory"
else
    echo "I do not know what \$1 is"
fi
exit 0
```


##### Using || and &&

Consider two one-liners:

```sh 
[ -z $1 ] && echo no argument provided
ping -c 1 10.0.0.20 2>/dev/null || echo node is not available
```

##### Applying for 

```sh
#!/bin/bash
for ((COUNTER=100; COUNTER>1; COUNTER--)); do
    echo $COUNTER
done
exit 0
```

Consider one-liner:
```sh
for i in {100..104}; do ping -c 1 192.168.4.$i > /dev/null && echo 192.168.4.$i is up; done
```

##### Understanding while and until

The **while** statement is useful if you want to monitor something like the availability of a process.

The counterpart of **while** is **until** which keeps the iteration open until a specific condition is true.

```sh
#!/bin/bash
# usage: monitor <processname>
while ps aux | grep $1 | grep -v grep > /dev/ttyll
do
    sleep 5
done
clear
echo You process has stopped
logger $1 is no longer present
mail -s "process $1 has stopped" root < .
```

Script above consists of two parts. 

The **while** loop **grep**s the **ps** command for the occurrence of **$1**. The inclusion of **grep -v grep** excludes lines containing the **grep** command from the result. (The **ps** command will include all running commands, including the **grep** command that the output of the **ps** command is piped to, which may result in a false positive.)

After the **while** loop, the several commands are executed. The line **mail -s "process $1 has stopped" root < .** represents a message that is sent to the user root using the internal mail handler. The **mail** command  takes as its first argument the subject, specified by the **-s** option. When using the **mail** command in an interactive mode, an editor will open. This editor is closed by providing a line that has only a dot. By placing this line in the script, the message may be processed without any further user activity.

##### Understanding case

The **case** statement is used to evaluate a number of expected values.

```sh
case "$1" in
    start)
        start;;
    stop)
        rm -f $lockfile
        stop;;
    restart)
        restart;;
    reload)
        reload;;
    status)
        status
        ;;
    *)
        echo "Usage: $0 (start|stop|restart|reload|status)"
        ;;
esac
```

In the script above, each item is followed by a **)**.

Also notice that **\*)** refers to all other options not previously specified (**catchall**).

##### Bash Shell Script Debugging

If a script does not do what you expect it do to, try starting it as an argument to the **bash -x** command. This will show you line by line what the script is trying to do and also will show you specific errors if it does not work.

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Key Terms** shebang, parent, shell, subshell, variable, iteration, conditional loop, OR, AND

#### Review Questions

1. What is the effect if a script does _not_ start with a shebang?
2. How can you check if a variable VAR has not value?
3. What would you use in a script to count the number of arguments that have been used?
4. What would you use to refer to all arguments that have been used when starting the script?
5. How do you process user input in a script?
6. what is the simplest way to test whether a file exists and execute the command **echo "file does not exist"** if it does not?
7. Which test would you perform to find out if an item is a file or a directory?
8. Which construction would you use to evaluate a range of items?
9. How do you close an **elif** statement?
10. In a **case** statement, you evaluate a range of items. For each of these items you execute one or more commands. What do you need to use after the last command to close the specifict item?

#### End-of_Chapter Lab

1. Write a script that works with arguments. If the argument **one** is used, the scrpt should create a file /tmp/one If the argument **two** is used, the script should send a message containing the subject "two" to the root user.
2. Write a countdown script. The script should use one argument (and not more than one). This argument specifies the number of minutes to count down. It should start with that number of minutes and count down second by second, writing the text "there are nn seconds remaining" at every iteration. Use **sleep** to define the seconds. When there is no more time left, the script should echo "time is over" and quit.