### Configuring SSH

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which of the following is _not_ a common approach to prevent brute-force attacks against SSH servers?

2. Which of the following successfully limits SSH server access to users bob and lisa only?

3. Which of the following commands must be used to provide nondefault port 2022 with the correct SELinux label?

4. Which of the following descriptions is correct for the MaxAuthTries options?

5. Which log file do you analyze to get information about failed SSH login attempts?

6. SSH login in your test environment takes a long time. Which of the following options could be most likely responsible for the connection time problems?

7. Which of the following options is _not_ used to keep SSH connections alive?

8. Which file on an SSH client computer needs to be added to set the ServerKeepAliveInterval for an individual user?

9. Assuming that a passphrase-protected public/private key pair has already been created, how do you configure your sessions so that you have to enter the passphrase once only?

10. The MaxSessions option can be used to tune the maximum number of sessions that can be open at the same time. Which value does it have by default?

#### Foundation Topics

#### Hardening the SSH Server

Dictionary attacks are common against an SSH server. The attacker uses the fact that SSH servers usually offer their services on port 22 and that every Linux server has a root account. If the password uses limited complexity and no additional security measures have been taken, sooner or later the intruder will be able to connect. 

Security measures to protect SSH servers:
1. Disable root login
2. Disable password login
3. Configure a nondefault port for SSH to listen on
4. Allow specific users only to log in on SSH

##### Limiting Root Access

The fact that SSH servers by default have root login enabled is the biggest security problem.

Disabling root login is easy - just modify the PermitRootLogin parameter in **/etc/ssh/sshd_config** and reload or restart the service. (On exam, save time and use **systemctl restart \<servicename>** to load new configurations.)

After disabling root login, specify username by using **ssh user@servername** or **ssh -l \<user> \<servername>**.

##### Configuring Alternative Ports

To protect against port scans, configure your SSH server to listen on another port. 

Change the ssh port in **sshd_config** file.

Might be best to configure SSH to listen on port 443.

Port 443 by default is assigned to web servers using Transport Layer Security (TLS) to offer encryption. 

If users who want to access SSH server are normally behind a proxy that allows traffic to ports 80 and 443 only, it may make sense to configure SSH to listen on port 443. By doing so, however, port 443 cannot be used by your web server, since a port can be assigned to only one service at a time.

To avoid being locked out of your server after making a change to the SSH listening port while connected remotely, open two sessions to your SSH server. Use one session to change and test. Use the other to keep the connection open. Active sessions will not be disconnected after restarting the SSH server.

##### Modifying SELinux to Allow for Port Changes

See **COMMANDS**

##### Limiting User Access

The AllowUsers option by default does not appear anywhere in the default /etc/ssh/sshd_config file.

The AllowUsers option is better than PermitRootLogin because it is more restrictive.

If AllowUsers does not specify root, you can still become root by using **su -** after making a connection as a normal user.

#### Using Other Useful sshd Options

##### Session Options

The GSSAPIAuthentication open, which in RHEL 8 is set to **yes** by default, is useful with Kerberos authentication is used.

The UseDNS option is on by default and instructs the SSH server to look up the remote hostname and check with DNS that the resolved hostname for the remote host maps back to the same IP address.

The MaxSessions option specifies the maximum number of sessions that can be opened from one IP address simultaneously. If expecting multiple users from same IP address, increase this option beyond its default value of 10.

##### Connection Keepalive Options

The TCPKeepAlive option is used to monitor whether the client is still available. Using this option (which is on by default) ensures that the connection is released for any machine that is inactive for a certain amount of time. If used by itself, however, it might lead to a situation where unused connections are released as well, which is why it makes sense to use the ClientAliveInterval option. This option sets an interval, in seconds, after which the server sends a packet to the client if no activity has been detected. The ClientAliveCountMax parameter specifies how many of these packets should be sent. If the ClientAliveInterval is set to 30, and the ClientAliveCountMax is set to 10, for instance, inactive connections are kept alive for about 5 minutes.

The ClientAliveInterval and the ClientAliveCountMax options can be specified on a server only. There is a client-side equivalent to these options also. If you cannot change the configuration of the SSH server, use the ServerAliveInterval and ServerAliveCountMax options to initiate connection keepalive traffic from the client machine. These options are set in the **/etc/ssh/ssh_config** file or the **~/.ssh/config** if applied for individual users.

**Options** | **Use**
------- | -------
Port | Defines the TCP listening port.
PermitRootLogin | Indicates whether to allow or disallow root login.
MaxAuthTries | Specifies the max number of authentication tries. After reaching half of this number, failures are logged to syslog.
MaxSessions | Indicates the max number of sessions that can be open from one IP address.
AllowUsers | Specifies a space-separated list of users who are allowed to connect to the server.
PasswordAuthentication | Specifies whether to allow password authentication.  This option is on by default.
GSSAPIAuthentication | Indicates whether authentication through the GSSAPI needs to be enabled. Used for Kerberos-based authentication.
TCPKeepAlive | Specifies whether or not to clean up inactive TCP connections.
ClientAliveInterval | Specifies the interval, in seconds, that packets are sent to the client to figure out if the client is still alive.
ClientAliveCountMax | Specifies the number of client alive packets that need to be sent. 
UseDNS | If on, uses DNS name lookup to match incoming IP addresses to names.
ServerAliveInterval | Specifies the interval, in seconds, that a client sends a packet to a server to keep connections alive.
ServerAliveCountMax | Specifies the maximum number of packets a client sends to a server to keep connections alive.

#### Configuring Key-Based Authentication with Passphrases

If you want to allow public / private key-based authentication only and disable password-based authentication completely, set the PasswordAuthentication option to no.

For establishing client / server connections with public / private keys, it is recommended to use passphrases. For users to enter a passphrase every time before a connection can be created is inconvenient.

The passphrase can be cached for a session. To do this, use the **ssh-agent** and **ssh-add** commands.

1. Type **ssh-agent /bin/bash** to start the agent for the current shell (in this case, Bash).
2. Type **ssh-add** to add the passphrase for the current user's private key. The key is now cached.
3. Connect to the remote server. Notice that there is no longer a need to enter the passphrase.



#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Key Terms** passphrase, connection

#### Review Questions

1. Which two commands do you need to cache the passphrase that is set on your private key?
2. You want to disallow root login and only allow user lisa to log in to your server. How would you do that?
3. How do you configure your SSH server to listen on two different ports?
4. What is the name of the main SSH configuration file?
5. When configuring a cache to store the passphrase for your key, where will thsi passphrase be stored?
6. What is the name of the file that contains SSh client settings for all userS?
7. Which setting should you sue to set the maximum number of concurrent SSH sessions to 10?
8. How do you configure SELinux to allow SSH to bind to port 2022?
9. How do you configure the firewall on the SSh server to allow incoming connections to port 2022?
10. Which setting could you use if you experience long timeouts while trying to establish an SSH connection?

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

1. Configure your SSH server in such a way that inactive sessions will be kept open for at least one hour.
2. Secure your SSH server so that it listens on port 2022 only and that only user lisa is allowed to log in.
3. Test the settings for server2. Make sure that the firewall as well as SELinux are configured to support your settings.

### COMMANDS

* **ssh user@servername** - specify username for ssh login
* **ssh -l \<user> \<servername>** - specify username for ssh login
* **semanage port** - allow a service to connect to a nondefault port
* **semanage port -l** - check whether port already has label
* **semanage port -a** - add label to port
* **semanage port -m** - modify current security label
* **semanage port -a -t ssh_port_t -p tcp 2022** - label port 2022 for access by sshd


### LOCATIONS

* **/etc/ssh/sshd_config** - modify ssh configurations
* **/var/log/secure** - login failures recorded here
