### Managing Apache HTTP Services

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which command installs the software packages that are needed to configure an Apache web server?
    1. **yum install httpd**
    2. **yum install web-server**
    3. **yum install apache**
    4. **yum install apache2**
2. What is the name of the main Apache configuration file?
    1. /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf
    2. /etc/httpd/httpd.conf
    3. /etc/apache2/apache.conf
    4. /etc/httpd/default-server.conf
3. Which parameter in the Apache configuration file is used to specify where Apache will serve its documents from?
    1. **ServerRoot**
    2. **ServerDocuments**
    3. **DocumentRoot**
    4. **DocumentIndex**
4. Which parameter in the main Apache configuration file defines the location where the Apache process looks for its configuration files?
    1. **ServerRoot**
    2. **ServerDocuments**
    3. **DocumentRoot**
    4. **DocumentIndex**
5. Which directory contains the main Apache configuration file?
    1. /etc/httpd
    2. /etc/httpd/conf
    3. /etc/httpd/conf.d
    4. /etc/httpd/conf.modules.d
6. Which directory contains the configuration files for the different Apache modules?
    1. /etc/httpd
    2. /etc/httpd/conf
    3. /etc/httpd/conf.d
    4. /etc/httpd/conf.modules.d
7. Which directory is used to drop configuration files that are installed from RPMs?
    1. /etc/httpd
    2. /etc/httpd/conf
    3. /etc/httpd/conf.d
    4. /etc/http/conf.modules.d
8. Which virtual host type allows you to run multiple virtual hosts on the same IP address?
    1. Name-based
    2. IP-based
    3. Configuration-based
    4. Default
9. Which line is used to start the definition of a virtual host that listens on port 80 of all IP addresses on the current server?
    1. **<VirtualHost \*:80>**
    2. **<VirtualHost \*>**
    3. **<NameHost \*:80**
    4. **<NameHost \*>**
10. Which of the following statements about virtual hosts is _not_ true?
    1. When virtual hosts are offered through an httpd process, the default configuration no longer works.
    2. The names of virtual hosts must be resolvable thorugh /etc/hosts or DNS.
    3. To use virtual hsots, the mod_virt package must be installed.
    4. Virtual host configurations can be specified in httpd.conf.

#### Foundation Topics

#### Configuring a Basic Apache Server

Configuring a basic Apache server consists of a few easy steps:
1. Install the required software.
2. Identify the main configuration file.
3. Create some web server content.

##### Installing the Required Software

See **COMMANDS**

##### Identifying the Main Configuration File

The main Apache configuration file is **/etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf**.

The most important parameter to understand for setting up a basic web server is the DocumentRoot parameter, which specifies the default location where the Apache web server looks for its contents.

Another important configuration parameter is the ServerRoot. This defines the default directory where Apache will look for its configuration files. By default, the **/etc/httpd** directory is used for this purpose. 

##### Creating Web Server Content

The Apache web server by default looks for a file with the name index.html and will present the contents of that document to client using a browser to access the web server.

#### Understanding Apache Configuration Files

A default configuration of the Apache web server creates a relatively complex configuration tree in the **/etc/httpd** directory.

Using command **\ls -l**, display contents of the **/etc/httpd** directory. You should see three symbolic links to logs, modules and a run directory. This allows Apache to be started in a chroot environment.

A chroot environment provides a fake root directory. Processes that are running in a chroot environment can access files in that chroot environment only, which decreases the risk of security incidents occurring when intruders manage to get a login shell using the web server identity and try walking through the file system.

The main configuration files for the Apache web server are in the **/etc/httpd/conf** directory.

The **/etc/httpd/conf.d** directory contains files that are included in the Apache configuration. Adding files is done by the line Include conf.d/*.conf in the httpd.conf file.

The last configuration directory is **/etc/httpd/conf.modules.d**. This allows Apache web server to be extended by adding additional modules that enable many different features.

#### Creating Apache Virtual Hosts

Apache can be configured to run with virtual hosts.

A virtual host is a distinct Apache configuration file or section that is created for a unique hostname.

The procedure to access the host is roughly like the following:
1. Client starts a session to a specific virtual host, normally by starting a browser and entering the URL to the website the client wants to use.
2. DNS helps resolve the IP address of the virtual host, which is the IP address of the Apache server that can host different virtual hosts.
3. The Apache process receives requests for all the virtual hosts it is hosting.
4. The Apache process reads the HTTP header of each request to analyze which virtual host this request needs to be forwarded to.
5. Apache reads the specific virtual host configuration file to find which document root is used by this specific virtual host.
6. The request is forwarded to the appropriate contents file in that specific document root.

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Key Terms** DocumentRoot, virtual host, chroot

#### Review Questions

1. Which **yum** group contains many useful Apache packages?
2. How do you enabled the httpd service to be started automatically when booting?
3. What is the default location where RPMs can drop plug-in configuration files that should be considered by the Apache server?
4. Which command enables you to test a web server fro ma server that does not offer a graphical interface?
5. What is the name of the default Apache configuration file?
6. Which directory is used as the default Apache document root?
7. Which files does the Apache  process look for by default in the document root?
8. Which command enables you to see whether the Apache web server is currently running?
9. Which location is preferable for storing virtual host configuration files?
10. Names of configuration files and directories in the main Apache configuration file are relative to the ServerRoot. To which directory is the ServerRoot set by default?

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

1. Install the required packages that allow you to run a basic web server. Make sure that the web server process is started automatically when your server reboots. Do _not_ use a virtual server.
2. Use **curl** to make sure the web server presents a default page showing "Welcome to my web server."
3. Type **yum install httpd-manual** to install the Apache documentation.
4. Use a browser to test access to the /manual web page on your server.

### COMMANDS

* **yum search httpd** - displays an overview of httpd and additional packages
* **yum module install httpd** - install base package and common additional modules
* **grep -v '#' /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf** - display contents of file that aren't commented out
* **systemctl enable --now httpd** - start and enable the web server
* **systemctl status httpd** - check status of Apache web server
* **yum install curl** - install elinks text-based browser
* **curl http://localhost** - connect to the web server and verify its working

### LOCATIONS

* **/etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf** - main Apache configuration file
* **/etc/httpd** - directory used as default for Apache configuration files