### Configuring a Firewall

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which of the following is not a valid SELinux mode?
    1. Enforcing
    2. Permissive
    3. Disabled
    4. Enabled
2. Which of the following commands enable you to see the current SELinux mode? (Choose two.)
    1. **sestatus**
    2. **lsmode**
    3. **semode**
    4. **getenforce**
3. Which of the following items in the context label is not the most significant for SELinux system administration tasks?
    1. Type
    2. User
    3. Role
    4. Mission
4. To which of the following can SELinux security _not_ be applied?
    1. Users
    2. Files
    3. Ports
    4. It can be applied to all of the above.
5. Which command-line switch is used with many commands to display SELinux-related information?
    1. **-S**
    2. **-X**
    3. **-Z**
    4. **-D**
6. Which of the following commands should be used to set te context type of the directory /web to httpd_sys_content_t?
    1. **chcon -t httpd_sys_content_t/web**
    2. **semanage -t httpd_sys_content_t "/web(/.\*)?"**
    3. **semanage fcontext -t httpd_sys_content_t "/web(/.\*)?"**
    4. **semanage fcontext -a -t httpd_sys_content_t "/web(/.\*)?"**
7. Which command must you run to ensure that a file has the appropriate SELinux context after moving the file to another location?
    1. **reboot**
    2. **restorecon /new/filename**
    3. **chcon**
    4. **restorecon -R /etc/selinux -v**
8. Which command enables you to change a Boolean in a way that it survives a reboot?
    1. **chcon boolean -P**
    2. **setsebool -P**
    3. **setsebool**
    4. **semanage boolean** 
9. Which file contains all information you need to troubleshoot SELinux messsages?
    1. /var/log/audit/audit.log
    2. /var/log/selinux/selinux.log
    3. /var/log/messages
    4. /var/log/selinux.log
10. You want to grep the log file for SELinux log messages. Which of the following strings should you use **grep** on?
    1. selinux
    2. deny
    3. violation
    4. avc

#### Foundation Topics

#### Understanding SELinux Working and Modes

IF SELinux is enabled and nothing else has been configured, all system calls are denied.

In a policy, rules define which source domain is allowed to access which target domain.

The source domain is the object that is trying to access something, typically a user or process.

The target domain is the object that is accessed, typically a file, directory, or network port.

To define what is allowed, context labels are used.

**Element** | **Use**
------- | -------
Policy | A collection of rules that define which source has access to which target.
Source domain | The object that is trying to access a target. Typically a user or process.
Target domain | The thing that a source domain is trying to access. Typically a file or a port.
Context | A security label that is used to categorize objects in SELinux.
Rule | A specific part of the policy that determines which source domain has which access permissions to which target domain.
Labels | Same as a context label, defined to determine which source domain has access to which target domain.

When SELinux is enabled, kernel support for SELinux is loaded and some applications that are SELinux aware change their behavior.

If SELinux is disabled, no SELinux activity happens at all.

Changing SELinux modes requires a reboot of system.

If enabled, permissive SELinux logs all SELinux activity.

If enabled, enforcing SELinux enforces all SELinux rules.

Do not change the contents of **/etc/sysconfig/selinux** on the exam. On the exam, SELinux must be in enforcing mode. To troubleshoot SELinux, you can place it temporarily in permissive mode by using **setenforce 0**.

#### Understanding Context Settings and the Policy

The context is a label that can be applied to different objects:
1. Files and directories
2. Ports
3. Processes
4. Users

##### Monitoring Current Context Labels

Each context label always consists of three parts:
1. **User** The user can be recognized by the _u in the context label. SELinux users are not the same as Linux users and not important for RHCSA exam.
2. **Role** The role can be recognized by the _r in the context label. In advanced SELinux management, specific SELinux users can be assigned permissions to specific SELinux roles. SELinux roles are not important for RHCSA exam.
3. **Type** The type can be recognized by _t in the context label. RHCSA exam expects users to be familiar with SELinux context types.

##### Setting Context Types

Two commands to set context type:
* **semanage** Use this command. It writes new context to the SELinux policy, from which is applied to the file system.
* **chcon** For use in specific cases only and normally should be avoided. Command writes the new context to the file system and not to the policy. Everything that is applied with **chcon** is overwritten when the file system is relabeled or the original context is restored from the policy to the file system. Do _not_ use this command.

##### Finding the Context Type You Need

Three approaches to finding needed context:
1. Look at the default environment.
2. Read configuration files.
3. Use **man -k _selinux** to find SELinux-specific man pages for your service.

#### Restoring Default File Contents

How new context settings are applied:
* If a new file is created, it inherits the context settings from the parent directory.
* If a file is copied to a directory, this is considered a new file so it inherits the context settings from the parent directory.
* If a file is moved or copied while keeping its properties (using **cp -a**) the original context settings are applied.

To relabel entire file system, use command **restorecon -Rv** or create a file with the name **/.autorelabel**. Changes take effect on server restart.

On a large file system, relabeling the file system can take a significant amount of time.

#### Using Boolean Settings to Modify SELinux Settings

SELinux Booleans are provided to easily change the behavior of a rule.

If a conflict exists between the setting of a parameter in a service configuration file and in a Boolean, the Boolean always takes precedence.

#### Diagnosing and Addressing SELinux Policy Violations

The primary source to get logging information is the audit log, which is in **/var/log/audit/audit.log**. 

SELinux messages are logged with type=AVC in the audit log.

```
type=ACC msg=audit(1559986927.406:199) : avc: denied    { map } for pid=33214 comm="httpd" path="/web/index.html" dev="dm-0" ino=35321780 scontext=system_u:system_r:httpd_t:s0 tcontext=unconfined_u:object_r:default_t:s0 tclass=file permissive=1
```

The first relevant part in this line is the text avc: denied { map }. That means that a map request was denied, so some process has tried to read attributes of a file and that was denied, because it is a policy violation. Following that message, we can see comm=httpd, which means that the command trying to issue the getattr request was httpd and we can see path="web/index.html", which is the file that process tried to access.

In the last part of the log line,  we can get information about the source context and target context. The source context is set to http_t and the target context is set to default_t.

##### Making SELinux Analyzing Easier

**sealert** attempts to analyze what has happened and based on the analysis, suggests what should be done to fix it.

##### Preparing for SELinux Coverage on the Exam

In the current specification of the RHCSA exam, there is nothing about configuration of services.

SELinux is mostly useful for configuring services, but you don't have to install and secure any web, FTP, or file services on the RHCSA exam.

Master the following tasks:
* Ensure that SELinux is enabled and in enforcing mode by editing **/etc/sysconfig/selinux**.
* Use **restorecon** to reapply the right context to a file or directory.
* Use **sealert** to troubleshoot why SELinux isn't working.
* Make sure you know how to troubleshoot SELinux port-related issues.

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Key Terms** policy, enforcing, permissive, context, context type, source context, target context, audit log

#### Review Questions

1. You want to put SELinux temporarily in permissive mode. Which command do you use?
2. You need a list of all available Booleans. Which command do you use?
3. You do not see any service-specific SELinux man page. What solution do you need to apply?
4. What is the name of the package you need to install to get easy-to-read SELinux log messages in the audit log?
5. What commands do you need to run to apply the httpd_sys_content_t context type to the directory /web? 
6. When would you use the **chcon** command?
7. Which file do you need to change if you want to completely disable SELinux?
8. Where does SELinux log all of its messages?
9. You have no clue which context types are available for the ftp service. What command enables you to get more specific information?
10. Your service does not work as expected, and you want to know whether it is due to SELinux or something else. What is the easiest way to find out?

#### End-of-Chapter Labs

1. Change the Apache document root to **/web**. In this directory, create a file with the name **index.html** and give it the contents **welcome to my web server**. Restart the httpd process and try to access the web server. This will not work. Fix the problem.
2. In the home directory of the user root, create a file with the name **hosts** and give it the following contents:
**192.168.4.200 labipa.example.com**\
**192.168.4.210 server1.example.com**\
**192.168.4.220 server2.example.com**
3. Move the file to the /etc directory and do what is necessary to give this file the correct context.

### COMMANDS

* **getenforce** - see mode of SELinux, if enabled
* **setenforce 0** - temporarily puts SELinux in permissive mode
* **setenforce 1** - temporarily puts SELinux in enforcing mode
* **sestatus -v** - shows detailed information about SELinux
* **ls -Z** - shows context settings for some directories in the / file system
* **ps Zaux** - shows list of all processes including their context label
* **ss -Ztul** - shows all network ports and current context label associated with each port
* **semanage** - writes new context to the SELinux policy, from which is applied to the file system.
* **chcon** - writes the new context to the file system and not to the policy and is overwritten when the file system is relabeled or the original context is restored from the policy to the file system
* **yum whatprovides \*/\<package>** - check for RPM containing **semanage**, for instance
* **ls -Z /var/www** - see context settings of server
* **semanage fcontext -a -t httpd_sys_content_t "/\<directory>(/.\*)?"** - to set context type to any new directory to be accessible by Apache web server
* **restorecon -R -v /\<directory>** - apply policy setting to the file system
* **man -k _selinux** - best way of getting SELinux information, which searches the database of man pages for pages that match _selinux in name or description
* **sepolicy manpage -a -p /usr/share/man/man8** - to install SELinux man pages (only with policycoreutils-devel package already installed)
* **yum provides \*/sepolicy** - check what RPM provides sepolicy
* **mandb** - update man database
* **restorecon** - reapply context settings from the policy to the file system
* **restorecon -Rv /** - relabel file system
* **getsebool -a** - list of Booleans on system
* **semanage boolean -l** - list of Booleans on system with more information
* **setsebool** - change a boolean
* **setsebool \<service> write on** - allow anonymous writes
* **setsebool -P** - permanently change a boolean
* **grep AVC /var/log/audit/audit.og** - check log for messages pertaining to SELinux (type=AVC)
* **yum -y install setroubleshoot-server** - install **sealert**


### LOCATIONS

* **/var/log/audit/audit/log** - check for SELinux logs
* **/etc/sysconfig/selinux** - where to set SELinux mode
