### Configuring a Firewall

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. Which of the following is not a standard Firewalld zone?

2. Which of the following is the name of the firewalling service as implemented in the Linux kernel?

3. Which of the following is _not_ an advantage of Firewalld?

4. Which command enables you to list all available Firewalld services?

5. What is the name of the GUI tool that enables you to easily manage Firewalld configurations?

6. Which of the following shows the correct syntax for adding a port persistently to the current Firewalld configuration?

7. Which zone would you use for an interface that is on a network where you need minimal firewall protection because every other computer on that same network is trusted?

8. Which of the following statements is true about the **--permanent** command-line options when used with **firewall-cmd**?

9. Which command enables you to get an overview of all the current firewall configurations for all zones?

10. Which of the following statements is _not_ true about the **firewall-config** GUI tool?

#### Foundation Topics

#### Understanding Linux Firewalling

Use a firewall to limit traffic coming in to a server or going out of the server.

Firewalling is implemented in the Linux kernel by means of the netfilter subsystem.

##### Understanding Previous Solutions

To interact with netfilter, different solutions can be used.

The command-line utility **iptables** was used on earlier version of Red Hat. 

**iptables** commands have complicated syntax.

**nftables** has replaced **iptables**.

##### Understanding Firewalld

**Firewalld** is a system service that configure firewall rules using different interfaces.

Administrators can manage rules in a Firewalld environment but even more important is that applications can request ports to be opened using the DBus messaging system, which means that rules can be added or removed without any direct action required of the system administrator. Applications address the firewall from user space.

##### Understanding Firewalld Zone

A _zone_ is a collection of rules that are applied to incoming packets matching a specific source address or network interface.

Firewalld applies to incoming packets only by default, and no filtering happens on outgoing packets.

**Zone Name** | **Default Settings**
------- | -------
**block** | Incoming network connections are rejected with an "icmp-host-prohibited" message. ONly network connections that were initiated on this system are allowed.
**dmz** | For use on computers in the demilitarized zone. Only selected incoming connections are accepted and limited access to the internal network is allowed.
**drop** | Any incoming packets are dropped and  there is no reply.
**external** | For use on external networks with masquerading (Network Address Translation (NAT)) enabled, used especially on routers. ONly selected incoming connections are accepted.
**home** | For use with home networks. Most computers on the same network are trusted and only selected incoming connections are accepted.
**internal** | For use in internal networks. Most computers on the same network are trusted and only selected incoming connections are accepted.
**public** | For use in public areas. Other computers in the same network are not trusted and limited connections are accepted. This is the default zone for all newly created network interfaces.
**trusted** | All network connections are accepted.
**work** | For use in work areas. Most computers on the same network are trusted and only selected incoming connections are accepted.

##### Understanding Firewalld Services

A service in Firewalld is _not_ the same as as a service in systemd.

A Firewalld service specifies exactly what should be accepted as incoming and outgoing traffic in the firewall.

A Firewalld service also specifies which ports should be opened as well as supporting kernel modules that should be loaded.

Behind each service is an XML configuration file. Changes are easily made to these files, which are typically stored in **/usr/lib/firewalld/services** directory.

Custom XML files can be added to the **/etc/firewalld/services** directory.

#### Working with Firewalld

Configure a firewall with the **firewall-cmd** command.

Firewalld offers a GUI version, **firewall-config**, but this is not covered on the exam.

The **firewall-cmd** tool is an easily accessible tool that enables administrators to change the runtime configuration of the firewall and to write this configuration to disk.

On the exam, work with services as much as possible. Adding individual ports is not a recommended practice.

**firewall-cmd Options** | **Explanation**
------- | -------
**--get-zones** | List all available zones
**--get-default-zone** | Shows the zone currently set as the default zone
**--set-default-zone=\<ZONE>** | Changes the default zone
**--get-services** | Shows all available services
**--list-services** | Shows services currently in use
**--add-service=\<service name> [--zone=\<ZONE>]** | Adds a service to the current default zone or the zone that is specified
**--remove-service=\<service-name>** | Removes a services from the configuration
**--list-all [--zone=\<ZONE>]** | Lists all configurations in a zone
**--add-port=\<port/protocol> [--zone=\<ZONE>]** | Adds a port and protocol
**--remove-port=\<port/protocol> [--zone=\<ZONE>]** | Removes a port from the configuration
**--add-interface=\<INTERFACE> [--zone=\<ZONE>]** | Adds an interface to the default zone or a specific zone that is specified
**--remove-interface=\<INTERFACE> [--zone=\<ZONE>]** | Removes an interface from a specific zone
**--add-source=\<ipaddress/netmask> [--zone=\<ZONE>]** | Adds a specific IP address
**--remove-source=\<ipaddress/netmask> [--zone=\<ZONE>]** | Removes an IP address from the configuration
**--permanent** | Writes configuration to disk and not to runtime
**--reload** | Reloads the on-disk configuration

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Key Terms** firewall, netfilter, iptables, nftables, Firewalld, zones, services

#### Review Questions

1. Which service should be running before you try to create a firewall configuration with **firewall-config**?
2. Which command adds UDP port 2345 to the firewall configuration in the default zone?
3. Which command enables you to list all firewall configurations in all zones?
4. Which command enables you to remove the vnc-server service from the current firewall configuration?
5. Which **firewall-cmd** command enables you to activate a new configuration that has been added with the **--permanent** option?
6. Which **firewall-cmd** option enables you to verify that a new configuration has been added to the current zone and is not active?
7. Which command enables you to add te interface eno1 to the public zone?
8. If you add a new interface to the firewall configuration while no zone is specified, which zone ill it be added to?
9. Which command enables you to add the source IP address 192.168.0.0/24 to the default zone?
10. Which command enables you to list all services that are currently available in Firewalld?

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

1. Create a firewall configuration that allows access to the following services that may be running on your server:
* web
* ftp
* ssh
2. Make sure the configuration is persistent and will be activated after a restart of your server.

### COMMANDS

* **firewall-cmd --get-services** - lists available Firewalld services
* **firewall-cmd --get-default-zone** - shows current default zone
* **firewall-cmd --get-zones** - displays available zones
* **firewall-cmd --list-all** - displays a complete overview of current firewall configuration
* **firewall-cmd --list-all --zone=public** - displays information about public zone
* **firewall-cmd --list-services** - displays services available in current zone
* **firewall-cmd --add-service=\<service name>** - add service to the firewall configuration (not permanent, restarting **firewalld** will clear it)
* **systemctl restart firewalld** - restart **firewalld**
* **firewall-cmd --add-service vnc-server --permanent** - add vnc-server service but make it permanent
* **firewall-cmd --reload** - reload the on-disk configuration into the runtime configuration
* **firewall-cmd --add-port=\<port number>/tcp --permanent** - add \<port number> to Firewalld configuration permanently


### LOCATIONS

* **/usr/lib/firewalld/services**
* **/etc/firewalld/services**