### Accessing Network Storage

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. If you want to enable an NFS share where all access to file in the share is anonymous, which of the following security options should you use?
    1. You do not have to specify anything; the default setting is based on anonymous access to files.
    2. **none**
    3. **sys**
    4. **krb5**
2. Which of the following is not a new feature in NFSv4?
    1. Integration with Active Directory
    2. Kerberized security
    3. Services offered on TCP port 2049
    4. The root mount
3. What is the name of the package that needs to be installed to mount NFS shares on an NFS client?
    1. nfs-client
    2. nfs-tools
    3. nfs-utils
    4. nfs
4. You type the command **showmount -e** to display available mounts on an NFS server but you do not get any result. Which of the following is the most likely explanation?
    1. The NFS client software is not running.
    2. You are using a UID that does not exist on the server.
    3. SELinux is not configured properly.
    4. The firewall does nto allow **showmount** traffic.
5. You want to log in to an SMB share. Which of the following commands shows correct syntax for doing so?
    1. **mount -o username=sambauser1 //server/share /somewhere**
    2. **mount -o uname=sambauser1 //server/share /somewhere**
    3. **mount sambauser1@//server/share /somewhere**
    4. **mount -o username=sambauser1@//server/share /somewhere**
6. Which of the following statements about authentication is true when configuring automatic mounts of SMB shares through fstab?
    1. You need to specify the username; while the share is mounted, you'll see a prompt for a password.
    2. You can only specify a username and a password by using mount options in /etc/fstab.
    3. You do not have to specify a username or a password in fstab; you are prompted for them when accessing the share.
    4. A secure way to specify a username and a a password is by using a credential file while mounting the share.
7. Which of the following is not a required step in configuring automount?
    1. Identify the name of the automount directory in /etc/auto.master.
    2. Create an indirect file in /etc/auto.something.
    3. Start and enable the autofs service.
    4. On the local mount point, set the appropriate permissions.
8. Assuming that the name of the directory you want automount to monitor is /myfiles, what is the recommended name for the corresponding configuration file?
    1. **/etc/automount/auto.myfiles**
    2. **/etc/auto.myfiles**
    3. **/etc/myfiles.auto**
    4. There is no recommended name.
9. Which of the following lines correctly identifies the syntax of a wildcard automount configuration that uses the NFS protocol?
    1. **&. -rw server:/homes/\***
    2. **&. rw  server:/homes/\***
    3. **\* -rw server:/homes/&**
    4. **\* rw  server:/homes/&**
10. What is the name of the service that automount uses?
    1. autofs
    2. automount
    3. autofiles
    4. auto

#### Foundation Topics

#### Using NFS Services

The classic network file system is NFS (which stands for Network File System).

Purpose of network file system is to make it possible to mount remote file systems into the local file system hierarchy.

##### Understanding NFS Security

When NFS was developed, it was often used together with Network Information Service (NIS), a solution that provides a network-based authentication server.

NIS isn't used uch anymore.

NFS should be used together with a centralized authentication service. 

Commonly, a combination of Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) and Kerberos is used to provide this functionality.

Configuration of LDAP and Kerberos is not included in RHCSA exam objectives.

##### RHEL 8 NFS Versions

On Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8, NFS 4 is the default version of NFS.

##### Mounting the NFS Share

To set up an NFS server:
1. Ceate a local directory you want to share.
2. Edit the **/etc/exports** file to define the NFS share.
3. Start the NFS server.
4. Configure your firewall to allow incoming NFS traffic.

##### Mounting the NFS Share

To discover which shares are available, you have multiple options:
* If NFSv4 is used on server, you can use a root mount. Just mount the root directory of the NFS server and under the mount point you'll see the shared that are accessible.
* Use **showmount -e nfsserver** command to see which shares are available. 

#### Using CIFS Services

Samba (also known as the Common Internet File System (CIFS)) is the de facto standard for sharing files between different operating systems.

##### Discovering CIFS Shares

Make sure that the cifs-utils and samba-client RPM packages are installed on client before mounting a CIFS share.

Use **smbclient -L \<servername>** command to discover available Samba shares.

##### Mounting the Samba Shares

Use the command **mount -t cifs** to mount a Samba share (**mount** is smart enough to recognize a Samba share without **-t cifs**).

##### Authenticating to Samba Shares

If you want to do something with a mounted share, you should authenticate as a valid Samba user.

**mount -o username=sambauser1 //server/share /somewhere**

##### Configuring a Samba Server

#### Mounting Remote File Systems Through fstab

If a file system needs to be available persistently, you need to use either **/etc/fstab** or the **autofs** service.

##### Mounting NFS Shares Through fstab

The **/etc/fstab** file is used to mount file systems that need to be mounted automatically when a server restarts.

To mount an NFS file system through **/etc/fstab**, make sure that the following line is included: 

```sh
server1:/share /nfs/mount/point nfs sync 0 0 
```

When making an NFS mount through fstab, options to consider:
* In the first column, specify server and share name. Use a colon after the name of the server to identify the mount as an NFS share.
* The second column has the file system where you want to do the mount, no different than a regular mount.
* The third column contains the NFS file system type.
* The fourth column is used to specify mount options and include the sync option. This ensure that modified files are committed to the remote file system immediately and not placed in write buffers.
* The fifth column contains a zero, which means that no backup support through **dump** utility is requested.
* The sixth column also contains a zero, to indicate that no **fsck** has to be performed on this file system while booting to check the integrity of the file system. The integrity of the file system should be checked on the server, not the client.

##### Mounting Samba Shares Through fstab

When mounting Samba file systems through **/etc/fstab**, you must specify the user credentials that are needed to issue the mount. 

On an NFS share, this is not necessary because user who access shared file system by default does so using own credentials.

While mounting a Samba share through **/etc/fstab**, user credentials are normally specified with the **username=** and **password=** mount options, but it is not a good idea to put these in clear text in the **/etc/fstab** file.

#### Using Automount to Mount Remote File Systems

Automount is an alternative to using **/etc/fstab**.

Automount can be used for SMB as well as NFS mounts.

##### Understanding Automount

Automount is implemented by the **autofs** service.

It is mounted on demand and does not have to be mounted permanently.

Automount operates completely in user space.

Root permissions are not required.

##### Defining Mounts in Automount

With automount, mounts are defined in a two-step procedure.

Edit the master configuration file **/etc/auto.master**.

First identify the mount point. Then identify the name of the secondary file.

```
/<mount_point>.   /etc/auto.<mount_point>
```

In the secondary file, put the name of the subdirectory that will be created in the mount point directory as a filename. For instance, start the line with **files** to mount **/\<mount_point>/files**. After the subdirectory specify the NFS mount options as well as the server and share name.

```
Files.  -rw.    server2:/<mount_point>
```

##### Configuring Automount for NFS

Checkout Exercise 24-5. Never got it working.

##### Using Wildcards in Automount

For home directories, using wildcards in automount is a helpful solution for mounting dynamic directories.

To create a wildcard mount, use lines like **\* -rw server2:/users/&**. The **&** represents the matching item on the remote server.

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Define Key Terms** SMB, CIFS, NFS, automount

#### Review Questions

1. On your NFS server, you have verified that the nfs service is active, and the firewall allows access to TCP port 2049. A client uses **showmount** against your server but doesn't see any exports. What si the most likely explanation?
2. Which command enables you to show available NFS mounts on server1?
3. Which command enables you to mount an NFS share that is available on server1:/share?
4. Which command can you sue to discover SMB mounts on a specific server?
5. Which package must be installed on an SMB client before you can make an SMB mount?
6. How do you mount the Samba share data on server1 with guest access on the local directory /mnt?
7. How do you mount a Samba mount through fstab while avoiding putting the username and password in /etc/fstab?
8. What is the name of the main automount configuration file?
9. What is the name of the service that implements automount?
10. Which ports do you need to open in the firewall of the automount client?

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

1. Set up an NFS server that shares the /home directory on server2.
2. Configure server 1 to access the NFS-shared home directory using automount. You need to do this using wildcard automount.

### COMMANDS

* **mount** - used to force a specific NFS version to be used for the mount
* **nfsvers=** - used to force a specific NFS version to be used for the mount
* **yum install -y nfs-utils** - installs packages for nfs
* **firewall-cmd --add-service nfs --permanent** - add nfs service
* **firewall-cmd --add-service rpc-bind --permanent** - add rpc-bind service
* **firewall-cmd --add-service mountd --permanent** - add mountd service
* **firewall-cmd --reload**
* **showmount -e nfsserver** - displays shares available to be mounted
* **smbclient -L \<servername>** - discover available Samba shares.
* **mount -t cifs \<//server/share_drive> /mnt** - mount Samba share
* **mount -t cifs -o user=guest \<//server/share_drive> /mnt** - mount Samba share with access for guest
* **mount -o username=\<samba_user> \<//server/share_drive> /mnt** - mount Samba share and authenticate as a valid Samba user

### LOCATIONS

* **/etc/fstab**