### Configuring Time Services

#### "Do I Know This Already?" Quiz

1. When a system is started, where does it initially get the system time?
    1. NTP
    2. Software time
    3. The hardware clock
    4. Network time
2. Which of the following statements is _not_ true about local time?
    1. Local time is the current time in the current time zone.
    2. In local time, DST is considered.
    3. System time typically should correspond to the current local time.
    4. Hardware time typically corresponds to the current local time.
3. Which is the recommended command in RHEL 8 to set teh local time zone?
    1. **hwclock**
    2. **tz**
    3. **date**
    4. **timedatectl**
4. Which clock  type would you recommend on a server that is _not_ connected to any other server but needs to be configured wit hteh most accurate time possible?
    1. RTC
    2. UTC
    3. An atomic clock
    4. NTP
5. Which configuration file contains the default list of NTP servers that should be contacted on RHEL 8?
    1. **/etc/ntp/ntp.conf**
    2. **/etc/ntp.conf**
    3. **/etc/chrony/chronyd.conf**
    4. **/etc/chrony.conf**
6. Which of the following shows correct syntax to set the current system time to 9:30 PM?
    1. **date 9:30**
    2. **date --set 8.30 PM**
    3. **date -s 21:30**
    4. **date 2130**
7. Which command correctly translates epoch time into human time?
    1. **time --date '@1420987251'**
    2. **time --date '$1420987251'**
    3. **time --date '#1420987251'**
    4. **time --date '1420987251'**
8. Which command enables you to monitor the difference between the hardware clock and system clock?
    1. **tail -f /var/lib/time/drift**
    2. **date -h**
    3. **hwclock -c**
    4. **hwclock -d**
9. Which command enables you to show current information that includes local time, hardware time, and the time zone the system is in?
    1. **timedatectl --all**
    2. **timedatectl --tz**
    3. **timedatectl -ht**
    4. **timedatectl**
10. Which command can you use to verify that a time client that is running the chrony service has successfully synchronized?
    1. **timedatectl**
    2. **chronyc sources**
    3. **systemctl chrony status**
    4. **chronyc status**

#### Foundation Topics

#### Understanding Local Time

**Concept** | **Explanation**
------- | -------
Hardware clock | The hardware clock that resides on the main card of a computer system
Real-time clock | Same as the hardware clock
System time | The time that is maintained by the operating system
Software clock | Similar to system time
Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) | A worldwide standard time
Daylight saving time | Calculation that is made to change time automatically when DST changes occur
Local time | The time that corresponds to the time in the current time zone

#### Using Network Time Protocol

The current system time is based on a hardware clock.

The hardware clock is typically a part of the computer's motherboard and it might be unreliable.

It is a good idea to use time from a a more reliable source.

Two solutions available:
1. Buy a more reliable hardware clock.
2. Configure server to use Network Time Protocal (NTP). 

NTP is a method of maintaining system time that is provided through NTP servers on the Internet.

The stratum defines the reliability of an NTP time source.


When configuring local time servers, use a high stratum number to configure the local time server as a backup. It will never be used when Internet time is available.

#### Managing Time on Red Hat Enterprise Linux

**Command** | **Short Description**
------- | -------
**date** | Manages local time
**hwclock** | Manages hardware time
**timedatectl** | Developed to manage all aspects of time on RHEL 8

On a Linux system, time is calculated as an offset of epoch time.

_Epoch time_ is the number of seconds since January 1, 1970 in UTC.

To convert an epoch time stamp to a human time, use **--date** option, followed by epoch string starting with **@**.

##### Using date

The **date** command enables you to use manage the system time.

See **COMMANDS**

##### Using hwclock

Using the **date** command will not change the hardware time that is used on your system.

See **COMMANDS**

##### Using timedatectl

The command **timedatectl** enables a user to manage many aspects of time.

**Command** | **Explanation**
------- | -------
**status** | Shows teh current time settings
**set-time TIME** | Sets the current time
**set-teimzone ZONE** | Sets the current time zone
**list-timezone** | Shows a list of all time zones
**set-local-rtc[0\|1]** | Controls whether the RTC (the real-time clock, normally referred to as the hardware clock) is in local time
**set-ntp[0\|1]** | Controls whether NTP is enabled

The **timedatectl** command was developed as a generic solution to manage time on RHEL 7. It's new.

When **timedatectl** is used to switch on NTP time, it talks to **chronyd** process.

##### Managing Time Zone Settings

On RHEL 8, there are three approaches for setting the correct local time zone:
1. Go to the directory **/usr/share/zoneinfo**. To set the local time zone on a server, create a symbolic link with the name **/etc/localtime** to the time zone that is involved. 
2. Use **tzselect** utility.
3. Use **timedatectl** to set the time zone information.

##### Configuring Time Service Clients

By default, the **chrony** service is configure to get the right time from the Internet.

As a default configuration, the highly reliable time servers from pool.ntp.org are used to synchronize time.

Exercise **25-2**.

#### Summary

#### Exam Preparation Tasks

**Key Terms** hardware time, RTC, system time, network time, UTC, epoch time, time synchronization, stratum

#### Review Questions

1. Which command enables you to set the system time to 4:24 PM?
2. Which command sets hardware time to the current system time?
3. Which command enables you to show epoch time as human-readable time?
4. Which command enables you to synchronize the system clock with hardware time?
5. Which service is used to manage NTP time on RHEL 8?
6. Which command enables you to use NTP time on your server?
7. Which configuration file contains the list of NTP servers to be used?
8. Which command enables you to list time zones?
9. Which command enables you to set the current time zone?
10. How do you use chrony to set system time?

#### End-of-Chapter Lab

1. Compare the current hardware time to the system time. If there is a difference, make sure to synchronize time.
2. Set the time zone to correspond to the current time in Boston (USA East Coast).

### COMMANDS

* **date --date '@1420987251'** - convert epoch date time to human date time
* **date** - shows the current system time
* **date +%d-%m-%y** - shows current system day of month, month, and year
* **date -s 16:03** - sets current time to 3 minutes past 4 PM
* **hwclock --systohc** - synchronizes current system time to the hardware clock
* **hwclock --hctosys** - synchronizes current hardware time to system clock
* **timedatectl** - manage many aspects of time on Linux system
* **ln -sf /usr/share/zoneinfo/American/Los_Angeles /etc/localtime** - create a symbolic link to set local time
* **tzselect**
* **timedatectl**

### LOCATIONS 
* **/usr/share/zoneinfo** - different subdirectories for each time zone that is defined
* **/etc/localtime** - location for setting local time